                              INCLUDES
                              Course framework
                               ample exam
                              S
                              questions
                              Scoring guidelines




AP Cybersecurity
        ®




COURSE AND EXAM DESCRIPTION




 Effective
 Fall 2026
AP Cybersecurity
           ®




COURSE AND EXAM DESCRIPTION




Effective
Fall 2026




AP COURSE AND EXAM DESCRIPTIONS ARE UPDATED PERIODICALLY
Please visit AP Central to determine whether a more recent course and
exam description is available.



                                                                        i
     What AP Stands For
                                    ®




     Thousands of Advanced Placement teachers have contributed to the principles
     articulated here. These principles are not new; they are, rather, a reminder of how AP
     already works in classrooms nationwide. The following principles are designed to
     ensure that teachers’ expertise is respected, required course content is understood,
     and that students are academically challenged and free to make up their own minds.
      1. AP stands for clarity and transparency. Teachers and students deserve clear
         expectations. The Advanced Placement Program makes public its course
         frameworks and sample assessments. Confusion about what is permitted in the
         classroom disrupts teachers and students as they navigate demanding work.
      2. AP is an unflinching encounter with evidence. AP courses enable students to
         develop as independent thinkers and to draw their own conclusions. Evidence
         and the scientific method are the starting place for conversations in AP courses.
      3. AP opposes censorship. AP is animated by a deep respect for the intellectual
         freedom of teachers and students alike. If a school bans required topics from
         their AP courses, the AP Program removes the AP designation from that course
         and its inclusion in the AP Course Ledger provided to colleges and universities.
         For example, the concepts of evolution are at the heart of college biology, and a
         course that neglects such concepts does not pass muster as AP Biology.
      4. AP opposes indoctrination. AP students are expected to analyze different
         perspectives from their own, and no points on the AP Exam are awarded for
         agreement with any specific viewpoint. AP students are not required to feel
         certain ways about themselves or the course content. AP courses instead
         develop students’ abilities to assess the credibility of sources, draw conclusions,
         and make up their own minds.
         As the AP English Literature course description states: “AP students are not
         expected or asked to subscribe to any one specific set of cultural or political
         values, but are expected to have the maturity to analyze perspectives different
         from their own and to question the meaning, purpose, or effect of such content
         within the literary work as a whole.”
      5. AP courses foster an open-minded approach to the histories and cultures
         of different peoples. The study of different nationalities, cultures, religions,
         races, and ethnicities is essential within a variety of academic disciplines. AP
         courses ground such studies in primary sources so that students can evaluate
         experiences and evidence for themselves.
      6. Every AP student who engages with evidence is listened to and respected.
         Students are encouraged to evaluate arguments but not one another. AP
         classrooms respect diversity in backgrounds, experiences, and viewpoints. The
         perspectives and contributions of the full range of AP students are sought and
         considered. Respectful debate of ideas is cultivated and protected; personal
         attacks have no place in AP.
      7. AP is a choice for parents and students. Parents and students freely choose to enroll
         in AP courses. Course descriptions are available online for parents and students to
         inform their choice. Parents do not define which college-level topics are suitable within
         AP courses; AP course and exam materials are crafted by committees of professors
         and other expert educators in each field. AP courses and exams are then further
         validated by the American Council on Education and studies that confirm the use of
         AP scores for college credits by thousands of colleges and universities nationwide.
     The AP Program encourages educators to review these principles with parents
     and students so they know what to expect in an AP course. Advanced Placement is
     always a choice, and it should be an informed one. AP teachers should be given the
     confidence and clarity that once parents have enrolled their child in an AP course,
     they have agreed to a classroom experience that embodies these principles.

     © 2026 The Advanced Placement Program, AP, AP Central, and the acorn logo are registered trademarks
     of the College Board. All other products and services may be trademarks of their respective owners.
ii   Visit College Board on the web: collegeboard.org.
Contents




COURSE FRAMEWORK




EXAM INFORMATION
Exam Overview
How Student Learning is Assessed on the AP Exam
SECTION I: Multiple-Choice
SECTION II: Free-Response
Task Verbs Used in Free-Response Questions
Sample Exam Question
SECTION I: Multiple-Choice
SECTION II: Free-Response


ANSWER KEY AND QUESTION ALIGNMENT TO COURSE
FRAMEWORK

SCORING GUIDELINES
Device Security Analysis




                                                  iii
                Acknowledgments
                The Advanced Placement Program would like to acknowledge the following
                committee members, consultants, and reviewers for their assistance with
                and commitment to the development of this course. All individuals and their
                affiliations were current at the time of contribution.


                Development Committee
                Bobbie Bastian, FutureForward at Bollman, Thornton, CO
                Dane Brown, United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD
                Joshua Brunty, Marshall University, Huntington, WV
                Victoria Ferrell, Forsyth Technical Community College, Winston-Salem, NC
                Donavon Lockett, Canyon Springs High School, Clark County School District,
                  North Las Vegas, NV
                Connar McCasland, University of West Florida, Pensacola, FL
                Jessica Tickle, Shawnee Mission School District Center for Academic
                  Achievement, Shawnee Mission, KS

                Higher Education Advisory Committee
                Dane Brown, United States Naval Academy, Annapolis, MD
                Jun Dai, Worcester Polytechnic Institute, Worcester, MA
                Melissa Dark, DARK Enterprises, Inc., Lafayette, IN
                Chance Folmar, Front Range Community College, Westminster, CO
                Tommy Gober, Emporia State University, Emporia, KS
                Angel Hueca, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA
                Terri Johnson Akse, University of Colorado–Colorado Springs, Colorado
                   Springs, CO
                Kyle Jones, Sinclair Community College, Dayton, OH
                Bekah Michael, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH
                Michael Qaissaunee, Brookdale Community College, Lincroft, NJ
                Diego Tibaquirá, Miami Dade College, Miami, FL
                Anthony Tsetse, Northern Kentucky University, Highland Heights, KY

                Industry Advisory Committee
                Charles Banks, VP & Manager of Information Security Services, U.S. Bank,
                  Cincinnati, OH
                Charles Gardner, EnterpriseKC, Leawood, KS
                Carol Kim, Director of Technology, Data & AI, IBM, Armonk, NY
                Dr. Cynthia Sutherland, CISSP Chief Information Security Officer
                   (Former) Joint Chiefs of Staff




iv   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                     return to contents
           High School Advisory Committee
           Beth Cerrone, Innovation Center, St. Vrain Valley School District, Longmont, CO
           Naomi Chamblee, Shelby County Area Technology Center, Shelbyville, KY
           Jeremiah Milonas, Red Bank Regional School District, Little Silver, NJ
           Kristi Rice, Spotsylvania High School, Spotsylvania, VA
           Jennifer Schmerber, Taft High School, San Antonio, TX

           Expert Consultants
           Devin Canaday, The STEMpreneur, LLC, Chester, VA
           Angel Piñeiro, Jr., ATCA Services, New York, NY
           Thomas Walcott, Gambrills, MD
           John R. Williamson, Eastern Kentucky University, Richmond, KY

           College Board Staff
           Joe MacAdam, Director, AP Cybersecurity Curriculum & Assessment
           Valerie Evans, Director, AP Cybersecurity Curriculum & Assessment
           Ben Dougherty, Senior Director, Manager, AP Computer Science and
             Cyber Curriculum & Assessment
           Simon Glick, Director, Content Development & Editorial, Career Kickstart
           Alesha Fox, Executive Director, AP Instructional Services
           Ellen Gluck, Senior Director, Career Kickstart Product Readiness
           Chad Hoge, Senior Director, Course Product Manager
           Daniel McDonough, Senior Director, AP Content & Assessment Publications
           Shawn Harris, Director, AP Career Kickstart Professional Learning
           Jason VanBilliard, Executive Director, Assessment Innovation & Department
             Head, AP Math, Computer Science, and Cyber Curriculum & Assessment
           Allison Thurber, Vice President, AP Curriculum & Assessment
           Andy Tucker, Senior Director, AP Access
           Abby Whitbeck, Vice President, AP Program Strategy




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                         return to contents   v
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
           About AP
           The Advanced Placement® Program (AP®) enables willing and academically
           prepared students to pursue college-level studies—with the opportunity to earn
           college credit, advanced placement, or both—while still in high school. Through
           AP courses in more than 40 subjects, each culminating in a challenging exam,
           students learn to think critically, construct solid arguments, and see many sides
           of an issue—skills that prepare them for college and beyond. Taking AP courses
           demonstrates to college admission officers that students have sought the most
           challenging curriculum available to them, and research indicates that students
           who score a 3 or higher on an AP Exam typically experience greater academic
           success in college and are more likely to earn a college degree than non-AP
           students. Each AP teacher’s syllabus is evaluated and approved by faculty
           from some of the nation’s leading colleges and universities, and AP Exams are
           developed and scored by college faculty and experienced AP teachers. Most
           four-year colleges and universities in the United States grant credit, advanced
           placement, or both on the basis of successful AP Exam scores—more than 3,300
           institutions worldwide annually receive AP scores.


           AP Course Development
           In an ongoing effort to maintain alignment with best practices in college-level
           learning, AP courses and exams emphasize challenging, research-based
           curricula aligned with higher education expectations.
           Individual teachers are responsible for designing their own curriculum for
           AP courses, selecting appropriate college-level readings, assignments, and
           resources. This course and exam description presents the content and skills that
           are the focus of the corresponding college course and that appear on the AP
           Exam. It also organizes the content and skills into a series of units that represent
           a sequence found in widely adopted college textbooks and that many AP
           teachers have told us they follow in order to focus their instruction. The intention
           of this publication is to respect teachers’ time and expertise by providing a
           roadmap that they can modify and adapt to their local priorities and preferences.


           Enrolling Students: Access, Opportunity, and
           Readiness
           The AP Program welcomes all students willing to challenge themselves with
           college-level coursework and career preparation. We strongly encourage
           educators to invite students into AP classes, including students from ethnic,
           racial, socioeconomic, geographic, or other groups not broadly participating in
           a school’s AP program. We believe that readiness for AP is attainable, and that
           educators can expand readiness by opening access to Pre-AP course work.
           We commit to support educators and communities in their efforts to make
           AP courses widely available, advancing students in their plans for college and
           careers.


           Offering AP Courses: The AP Course Audit
           The AP Program unequivocally supports the principle that each school
           implements its own curriculum that will enable students to develop the content
           understandings and skills described in the course framework.




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                              return to contents   1
               While the unit sequence represented in this publication is optional, the AP
               Program does have a short list of curricular and resource requirements that must
               be fulfilled before a school can label a course “Advanced Placement” or “AP.”
               Schools wishing to offer AP courses must participate in the AP Course Audit, a
               process through which AP teachers’ course materials are reviewed by college
               faculty. The AP Course Audit was created to provide teachers and administrators
               with clear guidelines on curricular and resource requirements for AP courses
               and to help colleges and universities validate courses marked “AP” on students’
               transcripts. This process ensures that AP teachers’ courses meet or exceed the
               curricular and resource expectations that college and secondary school faculty
               have established for college-level courses.
               The AP Course Audit form is submitted by the AP teacher and the school
               principal (or designated administrator) to confirm awareness and understanding
               of the curricular and resource requirements. A syllabus or course outline,
               detailing how course requirements are met, is submitted by the AP teacher for
               review by college faculty.
               Please visit the AP Course Audit website for more information to support the
               preparation and submission of materials for the AP Course Audit.


               How the AP Program Is Developed
               The scope of content for an AP course and exam is derived from an analysis of
               hundreds of syllabi and course offerings of colleges and universities. Using this
               research and data, a committee of college faculty and expert AP teachers work
               within the scope of the corresponding college course to articulate what students
               should know and be able to do upon the completion of the AP course. The
               resulting course framework is the heart of this course and exam description and
               serves as a blueprint of the content and skills that can appear on an AP Exam.
               The AP Test Development Committees are responsible for developing each AP
               Exam, ensuring the exam questions are aligned to the course framework. The
               AP Exam development process is a multiyear endeavor; all AP Exams undergo
               extensive review, revision, piloting, and analysis to ensure that questions are
               accurate, fair, and valid, and that there is an appropriate spread of difficulty
               across the questions.
               Committee members are selected to represent a variety of perspectives and
               institutions (public and private, small and large schools and colleges), and a
               range of gender, racial/ethnic, and regional groups. A list of contributors for each
               subject is available on AP Central®.
               Throughout AP course and exam development, College Board gathers feedback
               from various stakeholders in both secondary schools and higher education
               institutions. This feedback is carefully considered to ensure that AP courses and
               exams are able to provide students with a college-level learning experience and
               the opportunity to demonstrate their qualifications for advanced placement and/
               or college credit.


               How AP Exams Are Scored
               The exam scoring process, like the course and exam development process,
               relies on the expertise of both AP teachers and college faculty. While multiple-
               choice questions are scored by machine, the free-response questions and
               through-course performance assessments, as applicable, are scored by
               thousands of college faculty and expert AP teachers. Most are scored at the
               annual AP Reading, while a small portion is scored online. All AP Readers are
               thoroughly trained, and their work is monitored throughout the Reading for
               fairness and consistency. In each subject, a highly respected college faculty


2   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                              return to contents
           member serves as Chief Faculty Consultant and, with the help of AP Readers in
           leadership positions, maintains the accuracy of the scoring standards. Scores on
           the free-response questions and performance assessments are weighted and
           combined with the results of the computer-scored multiple-choice questions,
           and this raw score is converted into a composite AP score on a 1–5 scale.
           AP Exams are not norm referenced or graded on a curve. Instead, they are
           criterion-referenced, which means that every student who meets the criteria for
           an AP score of 2, 3, 4, or 5 will receive that score, no matter how many students
           that is. The criteria for the number of points a student must earn on the AP Exam
           to receive scores of 3, 4, or 5—the scores that research consistently validates
           for credit and placement purposes—include:

            § The number of points successful college students earn when their
              professors administer AP Exam questions to them.
            § Performance that researchers have found to be predictive of an AP student
              succeeding when placed into a subsequent higher-level college course.
            § The number of points college faculty indicate, after reviewing each AP
              question, that they expect is necessary to achieve each AP grade level.

           Using and Interpreting AP Scores
           The extensive work done by college faculty and AP teachers in the development
           of the course and exam and throughout the scoring process ensures that AP
           Exam scores accurately represent students’ achievement in the equivalent
           college course. Frequent and regular research studies establish the validity of AP
           scores as follows:

               AP Score      Credit Recommendation               College Grade Equivalent

                   5         Extremely well qualified                        A

                   4         Well qualified                               A-, B+, B

                   3         Qualified                                    B-, C+, C

                   2         Possibly qualified                             n/a

                   1         No recommendation                              n/a

           While colleges and universities are responsible for setting their own credit and
           placement policies, most private colleges and universities award credit and/or
           advanced placement for AP scores of 3 or higher. Additionally, most states in the
           U.S. have adopted statewide credit policies that ensure college credit for scores
           of 3 or higher at public colleges and universities. To confirm a specific college’s
           AP credit/ placement policy, use the search engine available on the AP Credit
           Policy Search page.

           BECOMING AN AP READER
           Each June, thousands of AP teachers and college faculty members from around
           the world gather for seven days in multiple locations to evaluate and score the
           free-response sections of the AP Exams. Ninety-eight percent of surveyed
           educators who took part in the AP Reading say it was a positive experience.
           There are many reasons to consider becoming an AP Reader, including
           opportunities to:

            § Bring positive changes to the classroom: Surveys show that the vast
              majority of returning AP Readers—both high school and college educators—




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                             return to contents   3
                    make improvements to the way they teach or score because of their
                    experience at the AP Reading.
                 § Gain in-depth understanding of AP Exam and AP scoring standards:
                   AP Readers gain exposure to the quality and depth of the responses from
                   the entire pool of AP Exam takers and thus are better able to assess their
                   students’ work in the classroom.
                 § Receive compensation: AP Readers are compensated for their work during
                   the Reading. Expenses, lodging, and meals are covered for Readers who
                   travel.
                 § Score from home: AP Readers have online distributed scoring opportunities
                   for certain subjects. Check the AP Reader site for details.
                 § Earn Continuing Education Units (CEUs): AP Readers earn professional
                   development hours and CEUs that can be applied to PD requirements by
                   states, districts, and schools.

               HOW TO APPLY
               Visit the Become an AP Reader site for eligibility requirements and to start the
               application process.




4   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                          return to contents
           About AP Career
           Kickstart
           AP Career Kickstart courses provide high schools a new set of AP offerings that
           prepare students for high-skill, high-growth careers through:

            § Instruction in both technical and professional skills
            § Emphasis on hands-on learning grounded in authentic scenarios
            § Alignment to career and technical education (CTE) and industry standards
            § Opportunity to earn an employer-endorsed credential upon achieving a
              qualifying exam score
           Students often recognize the benefits of career exploration while they are still in
           high school, but many lack access to quality career-focused programs that lead
           to in-demand jobs. With a proven record of delivering high-quality educational
           opportunities at scale, the Advanced Placement Program is building AP Career
           Kickstart courses to ensure nationwide access to outstanding career education
           that today is only available in some communities.


           How AP Career Kickstart Courses Are Developed
           Every AP course is designed—and regularly updated—to include current data,
           evidence, and findings in each discipline. AP courses include the content and
           skills most frequently taught in introductory college courses, so that students
           who earn qualifying scores on AP Exams can be placed into upper-division
           college courses with a strong foundation for success.
           AP Career Kickstart courses are built in partnership with industry advisors,
           higher education faculty, high school educators, and career and technical
           education (CTE) leaders. These advisors are engaged to evaluate research;
           recommend course skills, scope, and sequence; and review the course
           framework and the AP Exam.


           Credit and Placement
           The AP Program engages faculty from colleges and universities to ensure that
           AP Career Kickstart courses reflect the academic rigor of introductory college
           courses in the discipline. Students with qualifying AP Exam scores can earn
           credit or placement in required or elective courses at colleges and universities.


           Credentials and Industry Recognition
           The AP Program partners with industry leaders to ensure the course skills align
           with employer demand for core requirements in high-growth, high-demand jobs.
           Along with the potential to earn college credit, students with qualifying scores
           on the AP Exam will earn the AP Career Kickstart Employer-Endorsed Credential.
           Created in partnership with industry experts, AP Career Kickstart Credentials
           accelerate students’ progress toward in-demand careers and align with the
           needs of employers, college-level coursework, and secondary CTE programs.




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                             return to contents   5
               Students can leverage AP Career Kickstart Credentials in their efforts to further
               their postgraduation plans.

                 § For students who are considering moving directly to employment after
                   graduation, AP Career Kickstart Credentials can support their applications to
                   internships, apprenticeships, and part- and full-time employment.
                 § For students who plan to go on to higher education after graduation, two-
                   year and four-year colleges use AP Exam scores to award credit and facilitate
                   placement into associated programs of study.
                 § Students can list their AP Career Kickstart Credentials on résumés and post
                   them to career-oriented social media platforms.
                 § After earning AP Career Kickstart Credentials, students are well positioned
                   to earn “stackable” postsecondary and employer-endorsed credentials
                   throughout their education and professional development.




6   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                           return to contents
           AP Resources
           and Supports
           By completing a simple activation process at the start of the school year,
           teachers and students receive access to a robust set of classroom resources.


           AP Classroom
           AP Classroom is a dedicated online platform designed to support teachers and
           students throughout their AP experience. The platform provides a variety of
           powerful resources and tools to provide yearlong support to teachers, offering
           opportunities to give and get meaningful feedback on student progress.

           UNIT GUIDES
           Appearing in this publication and on AP Classroom, these planning guides
           outline all required course content and skills, organized into commonly taught
           units. Each unit guide suggests a sequence and pacing of content, scaffolds
           skill instruction across units, organizes content into topics, and provides tips on
           taking the AP Exam.

           LESSON PLANS
           Lesson Plans provided by the AP Program are designed to facilitate strong,
           relevant classroom learning experiences. They give teachers concrete,
           hands-on lessons that connect learning to authentic, professionally relevant
           experiences and help students build practical skills while engaging with course
           content. They serve as professional learning tools to support educator growth
           and as classroom-ready exemplars that demonstrate relevant, engaging, and
           standards-aligned instruction.

           PROFESSIONAL SKILLS AND COLLABORATION RUBRICS
           Professional skills are best developed through meaningful, collaborative work
           in which students take ownership, solve authentic problems, and practice
           communication, teamwork, and critical thinking. These skills prepare students
           to work effectively with others and adapt to real workplace challenges. The
           Collaboration Rubric and Professional Skills Framework support teachers in
           this work by providing clear, practical instruction and tools to observe, nurture,
           and guide students’ growth toward authentic, workplace-ready collaboration and
           professional behavior.

           PRACTICE TESTS
           Full-length practice tests are available on AP Classroom. Full-length practice
           tests are timed like real tests, except you can move forward from one section
           to the next before time expires. Students who test with accommodations can
           select their accommodation when setting up the practice test to see how it will
           work on test day. Full-length practice tests are scored. After students complete
           a practice test in Bluebook, their scores will be available on the My Practice
           section of AP Classroom.

           REPORTS
           Reports provides teachers with a one-stop shop for student results on practice
           tests. Teachers can view class trends and see where students struggle with
           content and skills that will be assessed on the AP Exam. Students can view their
           own progress over time to improve their performance before the AP Exam.



AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                             return to contents   7
               CLASS SECTION SETUP AND ENROLLMENT
                 § Teachers and students sign into or create their College Board accounts.
                 § Teachers confirm that they have added the course they teach to their
                   AP Course Audit account and have had it approved by their school’s
                   administrator.
                 § Teachers or AP coordinators, depending on who the school has decided is
                   responsible, set up class sections so students can access AP resources and
                   have exams ordered on their behalf.
                 § Students join class sections with a join code provided by their teacher or AP
                   coordinator.
                 § Students will be asked for additional information upon joining their first class
                   section.




8   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                              return to contents
           Instructional Model
           Integrating AP resources throughout the course can help students develop skills
           and conceptual understandings. The instructional model outlined below shows
           possible ways to incorporate AP resources into the classroom.


           Plan
           Teachers may consider the following approaches as they plan their instruction
           before teaching each unit.

            § Review the overview at the start of each unit guide to identify skills and
              conceptual understanding for each unit.
            § Use the Unit at a Glance table to identify related topics that build toward a
              common understanding and then plan appropriate pacing for students.

           Teach
           When teaching, supporting resources could be used to build students’
           conceptual understanding and mastery of skills.

            § Use the topic pages in the unit guides to identify the required content.
            § Integrate the content with a skill, considering any appropriate scaffolding.
            § Use the available resources, including unit scenarios, to bring a variety of
              authentic experiences into the classroom.

           Assess
           Teachers can measure student understanding of the content and skills explored
           in the unit and provide actionable feedback to students.

            § Within each lesson, offer brief, formative assessments to check student
              understand and inform your next instructional move.
            § After teaching each topic, offer a formative assessment to check student
              understanding and provide just-in-time feedback.
            § At the end of each unit, create additional practice opportunities that will
              provide feedback to students on areas where they need to focus.




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                          return to contents   9
                About the AP
                Cybersecurity Course
                AP Cybersecurity trains students in the field and aligns closely with standard
                first-year collegiate cybersecurity courses. Students explore defense-in-depth
                strategies and learn to address specific vulnerabilities, attacks, mitigations, and
                detection measures across a variety of domains, including physical spaces,
                computer networks, devices, applications, and data. Developed in partnership
                with college faculty and industry leaders, this yearlong course aligns with the
                NICE Workforce Framework.


                AP Career Kickstart, a Group of AP Courses
                The “Career Kickstart” designation is awarded to AP courses developed not
                just with colleges to qualify high school students for college credit but also with
                industry leaders and employers to equip students with the skills needed for
                specific careers.


                College Course Equivalent
                The AP Cybersecurity course is designed to be the equivalent of a one-semester
                college introduction to cybersecurity course.


                Prerequisites
                There are no specific course prerequisites for AP Cybersecurity. Students
                should be motivated and willing to work both individually and in teams on
                college-level projects. AP Cybersecurity is designed to serve as a foundational
                course that aligns with multiple Programs of Study within Career and Technical
                Education (CTE) Digital Technology Pathways.


                Legal and Professional Norms for the Practice of
                Cybersecurity
                By its nature, cybersecurity relates to the storage, processing, and transmission
                of sensitive data (e.g., proprietary corporate data, financial data, health care data,
                educational data). To fulfill their responsibilities, cybersecurity professionals
                frequently have elevated permissions on devices and access to sensitive data.
                For this reason, there are norms for the practice of cybersecurity that guide
                cyber professionals in using their permission, access, and tools to secure and
                protect systems, data, organizations, and individuals.
                Instructors should share and review with students examples of norms from
                professional cybersecurity organizations (e.g., ISC2) and governmental
                organizations (e.g., the UK Cyber Security Council) so students understand why
                these norms exist as well as the importance of following them.
                In addition to professional norms, many types of data and sectors of industry are
                regulated by laws. Specific legal requirements vary by country, but the United
                States, United Kingdom, and European Union have laws relating to collecting,
                storing, processing, and transmitting data:

                  § Personally identifiable information (PII) (including biometric data like voice
                    recordings, fingerprints, and face scans)



10   AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                                return to contents
            § Protected health information (PHI)
            § Student education records
            § Financial records and transactions
           The security of some types of data is mandated by industry regulation. For
           example, the security of credit card payment data is regulated by the Payment
           Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS).
           Instructors are expected to introduce students to these laws, industry-specific
           regulations, and professional norms throughout the duration of the course,
           integrating them into appropriate topics.




AP Cybersecurity · ﻿                                                                         return to contents   11
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AP CYBERSECURITY




Course
Framework
               Introduction
               AP Cybersecurity is a broad introduction to the field of cybersecurity that
               aligns closely with a standard first-year college introductory cybersecurity
               course. Students learn about common threats and vulnerabilities and how
               those combine to create risk. Students study the ways that individuals and
               organizations manage risk and how risk can be mitigated through a defense-in-
               depth strategy. Students explore specific vulnerabilities, attacks, mitigations,
               and detection measures across a variety of domains, including physical spaces,
               computer networks, devices, and data and applications. Throughout the course,
               students consider the impact of cybersecurity on individuals, organizations,
               societies, and governments.
               Unit scenarios for each unit in the cybersecurity framework offer authentic
               cybersecurity situations and are designed to connect the knowledge and skills
               students gain in each unit to relevant, real-world applications. The scenarios in
               Unit 1 are relevant to personal security in everyday life, while the scenarios in
               Units 2–5 are derived from common tasks employees perform in cybersecurity
               jobs. Each scenario is paired with relevant student activities. The scenarios were
               developed in partnership with teachers from the AP community to share ways
               that they approach teaching some of the topics in each unit. These scenarios are
               offered to support hands-on, career-connected instruction. Teachers may use
               their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu of, those provided here.
               Each unit includes between one and five scenarios that highlight professional
               career situations that require the use of the skills and course content within that
               unit. Each scenario is aligned with the topics and learning objectives for that unit.
               For units with multiple scenarios, each one can be used independently, providing
               teachers with multiple instructional options: using one or more scenarios with all
               students or dividing the scenarios across different students within the class.




14   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents
          Course Framework
          Components
          Overview
          This course framework provides a clear and detailed description of the course
          requirements necessary for student success. The framework specifies what
          students must know, be able to do, and understand to qualify for college credit
          and/or placement.
          The course framework includes two essential components:


             (1) COURSE SKILLS
             Cybersecurity skills, including collaboration, are critical to the deep
             understanding and application of cybersecurity knowledge and practice.
             Students should develop and use these skills throughout the course.

             (2) COURSE CONTENT
             The course content is organized into units that reflect key domains
             of cybersecurity knowledge and practice. These units comprise the
             content and skills colleges and universities typically expect students to
             be proficient in to qualify for college credit and/or placement. Units 1–5
             introduce students to security and present knowledge and skills needed to
             secure spaces, secure networks, secure devices, and secure applications
             and data.




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                         return to contents   15
     1 AP CYBERSECURITY

     Cybersecurity Skills
                          Skill                       Skill                      Skill                     Skill
                          Category 1                  Category 2                 Category 3                Category 4

                          Analyze Risk                Mitigate Risk              Detect Attacks            Collaborate
                          Evaluate risk to            Implement protective       Implement detection       Work with others and
                          organizational              and deterrent              methods, monitor          AI to accomplish a
                          assets.                     security controls.         systems, and analyze      task.
                                                                                 evidence.

     Communicating         1.A Identify, with and     2.A Identify security       3.A Identify methods      4.A Develop clear, shared
     concepts             without the support         controls, and explain      for monitoring systems,   team objectives related to
     Explain key          of AI, vulnerabilities,     how they mitigate risks.   and explain how they      a cybersecurity task.
     cybersecurity        threats, and attack                                    detect attacks.
     concepts.            methods, and explain
                          how they generate risk.

     Investigating        1.B Determine ways          2.B Determine layered       3.B Determine             4.B Determine clear
     problems Explore     adversaries exploit         security controls that     strategies and methods    roles and responsibilities
     the parameters of    vulnerabilities to          address vulnerabilities.   to detect attacks.        for members of a team
     a problem to plan    compromise an                                                                    working to accomplish a
     for solutions.       asset.                                                                           cybersecurity task.


     Assessing impacts     1.C Evaluate, with and      2.C Evaluate, with         3.C Evaluate the          4.C Implement AI as
     Evaluate impacts     without the support of      and without the            impact of threat          a collaboration tool
     on systems.          AI, the likelihood and      support of AI, the         detection methods.        individually and as a
                          impact of risks.            impact of protective                                 group.
                                                      risk-management
                                                      strategies.

     Enacting solutions    1.D Document, with         2.D Implement and log      3.D Detect and            4.D Complete assigned
     Apply and            and without the support     mitigations with and       classify cyberattacks     work to accomplish
     communicate          of AI, the likelihood and   without the support        by analyzing digital      a collaborative
     solutions.           impact of risks.            of AI.                     evidence with and         cybersecurity task.
                                                                                 without the support
                                                                                 of AI.




16              AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents
     2 AP CYBERSECURITY


          Course Content
          This course framework provides a clear and detailed description of course
          requirements necessary for student success. The framework specifies what
          students should know and be able to do, with a focus on understanding,
          identifying, protecting against, and remediating common threats and
          vulnerabilities through a defense-in-depth strategy across a variety of
          domains including physical spaces, computer networks, devices, and data
          and applications. The framework emphasizes the impact of cybersecurity on
          individuals, organizations, governments, and societies.


          Units
          There are five units in AP Cybersecurity. Pacing recommendations at the unit
          level and on the Course at a Glance table provide suggestions for how to teach
          the required course content. The suggested class periods are based on a
          schedule in which the class meets five days a week for 45 minutes each day.
          While these recommendations have been made to aid in planning, adjust the
          pacing based on student needs, alternate schedules (e.g., block scheduling), or
          individual schools’ academic calendars.


          Topics
          Each unit is divided into teachable segments called topics. The topic pages
          (starting on page 33) contain all required content for each topic. Topics typically
          require 2-8 class periods of instruction. Teachers are not obligated to teach
          the topics in the suggested sequence listed in each unit. However, to receive
          authorization to label this course “Advanced Placement,” all topics must be
          included in the course.




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents   17
                                                      UNIT                                   UNIT

     Course at                                        1                                      2
     a Glance
                                                 Introduction
                                                 to Security                             Securing Spaces
                                                        ~10                                     ~21
     Plan                                         class periods                           class periods

     The Course at a Glance provides            Skill           Topic                   Skill          Topic
     a useful visual organization of the
                                                  1       1.1   Understanding            1       2.1   Cyber Foundations
     AP Cybersecurity components,                               Social Engineering       2
     including:
                                                  1       1.2   Suspicious               1       2.2   Physical Vulnerabilities
      § Sequence of units, along with             2             Website Logins                         and Attacks
        suggested pacing. Please
                                                  1       1.3   Best Practices for       2       2.3   Protecting Physical
        note, pacing is based on                  2             Public Networks                        Spaces
        45-minute class periods,
        meeting five days each week               1       1.4   AI-Based                 3       2.4   Detecting Physical
                                                  2             Cybersecurity Attacks                  Attacks
        for a full academic year.
      § Progression of topics within              2       1.5   Leveraging AI in
                                                  3             Cyber Defense
        each unit.

     Teach
     COURSE SKILLS
     1   Analyze Risk
     2   Mitigate Risk
     3   Detect Attacks
     4   Collaborate

     Assess
     At the end of each topic and unit,
     assess students’ understanding of
     the content and skills and provide
     them with actionable feedback.




18              AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents
     UNIT                                            UNIT                                    UNIT

     3                                               4                                       5
                                                                                         Securing
                                                                                         Applications
 Securing Networks                              Securing Devices                         and Data
        ~26                                            ~23                                      ~30
  class periods                                  class periods                            class periods

Skill           Topic                          Skill           Topic                    Skill          Topic
 1       3.1    Network Vulnerabilities          1       4.1   Device Vulnerabilities    1       5.1   Application and Data
                and Attacks                                    and Attacks                             Vulnerabilities and
                                                                                                       Attacks
 2       3.2    Protecting Networks:             2       4.2   Authentication
                Managerial Controls                                                      2       5.2   Protecting
                and Wireless Security            2       4.3   Protecting Devices                      Applications and Data:
                                                                                                       Managerial Controls
         3.3    Protecting Networks:             3       4.4   Detecting Attacks on
 2                                                                                                     and Access Controls
                Segmentation                                   Devices
                                                                                         2       5.3   Protecting Stored Data
 2       3.4    Protecting Networks:                                                                   with Cryptography
                Firewalls
                                                                                         2       5.4   Asymmetric
 3       3.5    Detecting Network                                                                      Cryptography
                Attacks
                                                                                         2       5.5   Protecting
                                                                                                       Applications

                                                                                         3       5.6   Detecting Attacks on
                                                                                                       Data and Applications




               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents   19
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AP CYBERSECURITY

Unit
Guides
Introduction
Developed in partnership with industry leaders, college faculty, and experienced
high school educators, these guides offer teachers helpful guidance in building
students’ skills and content knowledge.
This unit structure respects AP teachers’ time by providing one possible
sequence that can be adopted or modified, rather than having to be built from
scratch.
                             Using the Unit Guides
     Unit Openers                                UNIT

                                                  1        ~10 CLASS PERIODS


                                                           Introduction to
                                                           Security
     Developing Understanding                              Developing Understanding

     provides an overview that
                                                           In Unit 1, students experience three distinct examples of how adversaries try to
                                                           compromise systems: Students explore how adversaries use social engineering to
                                                           influence the behavior of targets and the impacts of targets clicking on malicious


     contextualizes and situates
                                                           links or downloading malicious files. Students see how adversaries compromise
                                                           systems through weak authentication, and they learn how to strengthen
                                                           authentication to protect themselves. Students learn about the hazards of public

     the key content of the unit
                                                           Wi-Fi, including how adversaries use it to attack victims, as well as how to protect
                                                           themselves.



     within the scope of the                               Building Cybersecurity Skills
                                                           In this first unit, students begin to explain how vulnerabilities in systems give rise to
                                                                                                                                                                               Building Cybersecurity
     course.
                                                           risk and learn to identify potential avenues of attack. Students learn how to identify
                                                           ways they can protect themselves from potential cyberattacks by mitigating risks.                                   Skills describes specific
                                                                                                                                                                               subskills within the course
                                                           Students also learn how to detect cyberattacks by analyzing log files and identifying
                                                           signs of suspicious activity—often called indicators of compromise (IoCs).



                                                                                                                                                                               skills that are appropriate
                                                                                                                                                                               to focus on in that unit.




                                                 AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents     27




     Unit Scenarios                                        UNIT

                                                            1                     Introduction to Security


     Unit scenarios are                                              Unit Scenarios
     designed to connect                                             The scenarios for this unit are designed to connect the knowledge and skills

     the knowledge and skills                                        students gain to relevant, real-world cybersecurity risks people regularly
                                                                     encounter. Each scenario is paired with relevant student activities. Teachers may


     students gain to relevant,
                                                                     use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu of, those provided here.


                                                                     SCENARIO 1A:

     real-world applications.                                        Detecting Phishing Messages
                                                                     You are sitting next to your teacher at their desk working on a problem when they


     They are paired with
                                                                     receive the following email. Your teacher wants to click on the link in the email,
                                                                     but you suspect it may not be legitimate.



     applicable student                                              The email:

                                                                         To: ljones@school.edu

     activities. Teachers may                                            From: do-not-reply@g00gle.com


     use their own scenarios in                                          Subject: [Urgent!] Access Requested



     addition to, or in lieu of, the
                                                                         One of your students has requested access to make a copy of a document.
                                                                         Click this link to authorize your student to copy your document.


     scenarios provided.
                                                                         If you don’t click the link, your student won’t be able to copy the
                                                                         document and complete their assignment.
                                                                         Research shows that the faster teachers respond to students’ document-
                                                                         sharing requests, the more likely students are to submit assignments on
                                                                         time.
                                                                         The Google Drive Team

                                                                     Consider the following questions:

                                                                      § What evidence could you use to convince your teacher that this email is not
                                                                        legitimate?
                                                                      § What elements of the email might cause someone to act impulsively?
                                                                      § What are some potential consequences for someone who clicked the link in
                                                                        the email?

                                                                     SCENARIO 1B:
                                                                     Detecting Unauthorized Logins
                                                                     You like to play internet-based games at home, but lately you’ve noticed that your
                                                                     games are running slower than usual. You check your router’s internet speed, and
                                                                     it is not as fast as it usually is. Wondering if another device on your network is
                                                                     hogging bandwidth, you check your Wi-Fi router’s authorization log, which shows
                                                                     all logged-in devices. Your family’s last name is Rivera and your family names all
                                                                     your devices with your last name.




                                            28            AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents




22               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                                                                                  return to contents
Unit at a Glance                                                    UNIT

                                                                     1                  Introduction to Security


Unit at a Glance shows the                         UNIT AT A GLANCE
topics, learning objectives,                              Topic                      Learning Objectives                         Scenario Connections
                                                                                                                                                                                 Class
                                                                                                                                                                                Periods

and connections to unit                              1.1 Understanding
                                                         Social
                                                                               1.1.A Identify common indicators of social
                                                                                     engineering tactics.
                                                                                                                              1A Detecting Phishing Messages
                                                                                                                                 Read Scenario 1A.
                                                                                                                                                                                    2



scenarios for each topic.
                                                         Engineering           1.1.B Explain how social engineering              Reflect on the questions at the end of
                                                                                     tactics influence victims to perform        the scenario.
                                                                                     a desired action.
                                                                               1.1.C Describe possible impacts for
                                                                                     victims of social engineering attacks.

                                                     1.2 Suspicious            1.2.A Identify common signs of a password      1B Detecting Unauthorized Logins                      2
                                                         Website Logins              attack.                                     Read Scenario 1B.
                                                                               1.2.B Explain how adversaries take                Reflect on the questions at the end of
                                                                                     advantage of weak authentication.           the scenario.
                                                                               1.2.C Explain how to make authentication
                                                                                     stronger.

                                                     1.3 Best Practices        1.3.A Identify the type of adversary           1C Impacts of Using Public Wi-Fi                      2
                                                         for Public                  conducting a cyberattack.                   Read Scenario 1C.
                                                         Networks              1.3.B Identify types of wireless                  Reflect on the questions at the end of
                                                                                     cyberattacks.                               the scenario.
                                                                               1.3.C Describe actions individuals can take
                                                                                     to increase protection of sensitive
                                                                                     data when using the internet and
                                                                                     Wi-Fi.

                                                     1.4 AI-Based              1.4.A Explain how adversaries use              1D AI-Powered Cyberattacks                            2
                                                         Cybersecurity               AI-powered tools to augment                 Read Scenario 1D.
                                                         Attacks                     cyberattacks.
                                                                                                                                 Reflect on the questions at the end of
                                                                               1.4.B Explain how to protect against some         the scenario.
                                                                                     AI-augmented cyberattacks.

                                                     1.5 Leveraging            1.5.A Explain how cyber defenders can          1E AI-Powered Cyber Defense                           2
                                                         AI in Cyber                 leverage AI-powered tools to protect        Read Scenario 1E.
                                                         Defense                     networks, applications, and data.
                                                                                                                                 Reflect on the questions at the end of
                                                                               1.5.B Explain how AI-powered tools are            the scenario.
                                                                                     enabling faster and more accurate
                                                                                     threat detection and response.




                                                                   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents




Topic Pages                         AP_Cybersecurity_CED.indd 32




                                                                                                                                                             UNIT
                                                                                                                                                                                          19-02-2026 21:17:24




                                          Introduction to Security
                                                                                                                                                              1
                                          TOPIC 1.1                                                                                               SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Suggested skills offer one
                                                                                                                                                                                                                or more recommended
                                                                                                                                                     1.A


                                          Understanding Social                                                                                    Identify, with and without the
                                                                                                                                                  support of AI, vulnerabilities,


                                                                                                                                                                                                                subskills to pair with the
                                                                                                                                                  threats, and attack methods,


                                          Engineering                                                                                             and explain how they generate
                                                                                                                                                  risk.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                topic.

                                          Required Course Content

Learning objectives define                     LEARNING OBJECTIVE                          ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Essential knowledge
what a student should be                        1.1.A
                                               Identify common indicators of
                                                                                            1.1.A.1
                                                                                           Social engineering attacks employ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                statements describe
able to do with content                                                                                                                                                                                         the knowledge required
                                               social engineering tactics.                 psychological tactics to manipulate users into
                                                                                           revealing sensitive information (elicitation),
                                                                                           downloading a malicious file, or clicking on

knowledge.
                                                                                           a malicious link. Social engineering can be
                                                                                           performed in person but is often done by
                                                                                           email, by text message, or through social
                                                                                                                                                                                                                to perform the learning
                                                                                           media messages.
                                                                                            1.1.A.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                objective.
                                                                                           Adversaries often use psychological
                                                                                           tactics like intimidation and urgency to
                                                                                           achieve their goals. Intimidation is when an
                                                                                           adversary threatens a target with negative
                                                                                           consequences if they don’t comply. Urgency
                                                                                           is when an adversary creates reasons why a
                                                                                           target should act quickly.

                                                1.1.B                                       1.1.B.1
                                               Explain how social engineering              Social engineering tactics rely on common
                                               tactics influence victims to                psychological principles that influence human
                                               perform a desired action.                   behavior.
                                                                                            1.1.B.2
                                                                                           Intimidation leverages a natural human
                                                                                           aversion to negative consequences. By
                                                                                           drawing attention to possible negative
                                                                                           consequences, adversaries use fear to incite
                                                                                           targets to act.
                                                                                            1.1.B.3
                                                                                           Urgency leverages a natural human response
                                                                                           to react quickly to time-sensitive needs.
                                                                                           When targets detect a sense of urgency in
                                                                                           a message, they feel pressured to respond
                                                                                           or act quickly, which can prevent them from
                                                                                           taking the time to consider whether an action
                                                                                           is reasonable or safe.


                                                         AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents           33




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                                                                                                                          return to contents    23
     Exam Overview
                                                          Sample Exam
                                                          Questions

                                                          The sample exam questions that follow illustrate the relationship between the
                                                          course framework and the AP Cybersecurity Exam and serve as examples of
                                                          the types of questions that appear on the exam. After the sample questions is a
                                                          table that shows which skill, learning objective(s), unit, and essential knowledge
                                                          statement(s) each question assesses. The table also provides the answers to the
                                                          multiple-choice questions.


     Sample multiple-choice                               Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions
                                                          The following are examples of the kinds of multiple-choice questions found on the

     questions serve as                                   exam.



     examples of the types of
                                                          1.   A cybersecurity analyst recently completed a review of a hotel’s security.
                                                               Consider the following information from their report.


     questions that may appear
                                                                The hotel’s Wi-Fi extends to the parking area, allowing outsiders
                                                                 potential access to the network.


     on the AP Exam.
                                                                Open network ports in the conference center connect to the hotel’s
                                                                 internal network and could enable spoofing of a legitimate device.
                                                                Guest feedback tablets in the lobby use a shared Wi-Fi network,
                                                                 exposing
                                                                nonsensitive customer satisfaction data.
                                                                Model numbers of printers and the firmware versions the printers are
                                                                 running are visible on the internal network, revealing some information
                                                                 about devices on the network.
                                                               Which of the following risks would the cybersecurity analyst most likely
                                                               document as a high risk?
                                                               (A) The hotel’s Wi-Fi extending to the parking area
                                                               (B) Open network ports in the conference center
                                                               (C) Guest feedback tablets using a shared Wi-Fi network
                                                               (D) The model numbers of printers and the firmware versions the printers
                                                                   are running being visible




                                                AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                             return to contents        149




                                                                         22. A hospital’s security manager has implemented an automated network
                                                                             security tool with the following functions.
                                                                               The tool analyzes network traffic for signs of malicious activity so the
                                                                                security team can quickly spot potential threats.
                                                                               The tool generates an alert when suspicious or malicious traffic is
                                                                                detected because the hospital wants to be notified right away if an attack
                                                                                is attempted.
                                                                               The tool does not take direct action to block or stop the traffic itself
                                                                                because the hospital wants administrators to decide how to respond to
                                                                                threats.

                                                                              Which of the following security systems did the security manager
                                                                              implement?
                                                                              (A) Data loss prevention system
                                                                              (B) Network intrusion prevention system
                                                                              (C) Network intrusion detection system
                                                                              (D) Security information and event management system

     A sample free-response                                              Section II: Free-Response Question

     question serves as an
                                                                         The following is an example of the free-response question found on the exam.

                                                                         Device Security Analysis



     example of the type of
                                                                         The following sources all come from the same device and are captured in a risk
                                                                         assessment for this device.



     question that may appear
                                                                         Source 1

                                                                         The device’s IP address is 192.168.1.10.


     on the AP Exam.                                                     Device Firewall Settings

                                                                            Rule                                                           Port
                                                                           Number     Action         Source      Destination    Direction Number      Protocol
                                                                              1        Deny    172.45.66.184    192.168.1.10     Inbound       22          SSH
                                                                              2        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       21          FTP
                                                                              3        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       80         HTTP
                                                                              4        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       445         SMB
                                                                              5        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       443      HTTPS
                                                                              6        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       22          SSH
                                                                              7        Allow   172.45.66.184    192.168.1.10     Inbound       3306     MySQL
                                                                              8        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10     Inbound       3389        RDP
                                                                              9        Allow    192.168.1.50    192.168.1.10     Inbound       5900        VNC
                                                                              10       Deny           ALL            ALL         Inbound       ALL         ALL




                                          158                  AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                               return to contents




24             AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                                                                                    return to contents
AP CYBERSECURITY


UNIT 1

Introduction
to Security



       ~10
       CLASS PERIODS
UNIT

 1        ~10 CLASS PERIODS


          Introduction to
          Security
          Developing Understanding
          In Unit 1, students experience three distinct examples of how adversaries try to
          compromise systems: Students explore how adversaries use social engineering to
          influence the behavior of targets and the impacts of targets clicking on malicious
          links or downloading malicious files. Students see how adversaries compromise
          systems through weak authentication, and they learn how to strengthen
          authentication to protect themselves. Students learn about the hazards of public
          Wi-Fi, including how adversaries use it to attack victims, as well as how to protect
          themselves.


          Building Cybersecurity Skills
          In this first unit, students begin to explain how vulnerabilities in systems give rise to
          risk and learn to identify potential avenues of attack. Students learn how to identify
          ways they can protect themselves from potential cyberattacks by mitigating risks.
          Students also learn how to detect cyberattacks by analyzing log files and identifying
          signs of suspicious activity—often called indicators of compromise (IoCs).




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                              return to contents   27
      UNIT

       1                    Introduction to Security



               Unit Scenarios
               The scenarios for this unit are designed to connect the knowledge and skills
               students gain to relevant, real-world cybersecurity risks people regularly
               encounter. Each scenario is paired with relevant student activities. Teachers may
               use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu of, those provided here.


               SCENARIO 1A:
               Detecting Phishing Messages
               You are sitting next to your teacher at their desk working on a problem when they
               receive the following email. Your teacher wants to click on the link in the email,
               but you suspect it may not be legitimate.


               The email:

                   To: ljones@school.edu
                   From: do-not-reply@g00gle.com

                   Subject: [Urgent!] Access Requested

                   One of your students has requested access to make a copy of a document.
                   Click this link to authorize your student to copy your document.
                   If you don’t click the link, your student won’t be able to copy the
                   document and complete their assignment.
                   Research shows that the faster teachers respond to students’ document-
                   sharing requests, the more likely students are to submit assignments on
                   time.
                   The Google Drive Team

               Consider the following questions:

                § What evidence could you use to convince your teacher that this email is not
                  legitimate?
                § What elements of the email might cause someone to act impulsively?
                § What are some potential consequences for someone who clicked the link in
                  the email?

               SCENARIO 1B:
               Detecting Unauthorized Logins
               You participate in an online game that allows users to create and manage virtual
               teams. One day, you discover that some of your previous choices have been
               modified without your knowledge. You check the account activity section, which
               lists each time the account was accessed. You normally log in to the website on
               weekends and evenings, when you’re not in school. A portion of the list of logins
               follows.




28   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents
                                                                                                       UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                        1
                 Website Logins
                  Entry                Date/Time                 Device IP Address
                   1            Saturday April 18 10:43             208.104.29.211

                   2            Sunday April 19 20:51               208.104.29.211

                   3            Tuesday April 21 18:34              208.104.29.211

                   4            Wednesday April 22 11:13            142.54.195.17

                   5            Saturday April 25 13:21             208.104.29.211

                   6            Sunday April 26 21:18               208.104.29.211

                   7            Monday April 27 10:07               142.54.195.17

                   8            Wednesday April 29 19:12            208.104.29.211


                 Consider the following questions:

                  § What types of information does this log contain?
                  § What patterns do you notice in this log?
                  § What entries in the log are suspicious and why?

                 SCENARIO 1C:
                 Verifying Network Authenticity
                 You go to your neighborhood coffee shop and try to connect to the shop’s
                 Wi-Fi network. You are redirected to a captive portal that requires you to
                 provide some information before allowing you to access the wireless network.
                 This captive portal has options for you to authenticate yourself by using your
                 account credentials for popular online platforms. You select one and enter your
                 login credentials for that platform, and you are granted access to the wireless
                 network.
                 You open your streaming music service to play some music, and start studying
                 for an upcoming test. While you are taking notes from your textbook, you notice
                 that your music has stopped playing. When you check your streaming music
                 service, you realize you have been logged out. When you try to log back in, the
                 service says that your password is invalid.
                 You notice a sign on the wall that says “Login to our free Wi-Fi network: Sunshine
                 Coffee Wi-Fi”, but you remember joining a network called “Guest Wi-Fi”. You
                 accidentally joined a network set up by an adversary to trick customers.
                 When you logged into the “Guest Wi-Fi” network, you were redirected to a fake
                 captive portal, set up by an adversary, where you supplied your login credentials
                 for a popular online platform. By submitting your credentials on the adversary’s
                 fake portal, they were able to capture your username and password. The
                 adversary then used those credentials to log in to other services you had linked
                 to the same platform, including your music service, and change your password.
                 This locked you out of your account.
                 Consider the following questions:

                  § How could you have avoided joining the malicious network in this scenario?
                  § What are the benefits and hazards of using one platform to log in to multiple
                    online services?



       AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents   29
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security


               SCENARIO 1D:
               AI-Powered Cyberattacks
               Sitting at home one day, you receive a call from a relative who is frantic, asking
               questions quickly: “Are you okay? Did you get the money I sent? How did you end
               up in so much trouble?”
               First, you calm them down and tell them you’re fine. Then you ask them to
               explain what they’re talking about. They say that you called them earlier from
               jail, claiming you had been arrested for stealing and needed bail money. They
               wired the money just as you instructed. You explain to them that you were never
               arrested, you haven’t left home all day, and you never called them. They’ve
               been scammed, but they insist that it was you calling them. They say it sounded
               exactly like you.
               What Really Happened?
               You have a social media account where you post short videos of yourself. Two
               weeks ago, you got a friend request on that platform. The friend request came
               from someone with a name similar to a kid at your school. Figuring it was them,
               you accepted the request. That person was actually an adversary pretending
               to be someone from your school. The adversary was able to scrape enough
               samples of your voice from your social media posts to feed into an AI tool that
               clones voices. The adversary used social media to find your relative and called
               them using the voice-cloning tool pretending to be you. They created a fake
               story about being caught stealing, being in jail, and needing bail money wired to
               them.
               Consider the following questions:

                § Do you know all your online connections (on social media and gaming
                  platforms) in real life? Do you know that they are who they claim to be?
                § Have you heard of adversaries trying to impersonate someone to get money
                  out of a relative?
                § How could you help protect relatives from becoming a victim of a scheme like
                  this?

               SCENARIO 1E:
               AI-Powered Cyber Defense
               The company you work for is developing a new web application that will allow
               customers to place orders in an online system. The application automatically
               accesses the company’s warehouse inventory database to display current item
               availability to customers. When a customer purchases an item through the web
               portal, the application updates the database to remove the item(s) the customer
               purchased.
               Before launching this new website, you ask an AI-powered tool to review the
               code and flag any potential security vulnerabilities. The AI tool flags several
               instances where a user input field is being fed directly into database requests
               as vulnerabilities. Adversaries could take advantage of those parts of the
               application to learn more about what is in the company’s warehouse and possibly
               modify the database in unintended ways.
               The AI tool recommends several fixes to the code that would validate and
               sanitize user input before passing commands to the database. You share these
               recommendations with the software development team, who review the code
               changes and update the code with appropriate suggestions. The application is
               then pushed to a testing environment before being deployed.


30   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents
                                                                                                 UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                  1
                 Consider the following questions:

                  § What are some potential advantages and disadvantages of using an AI-
                    powered tool to review application code?
                  § Why is it important for the development team to review the changes to the
                    application code before implementing them?
                  § Are there times when you use AI-powered tools to help you review your
                    work?




       AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents   31
            UNIT

            1                  Introduction to Security


UNIT AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                   Class
    Topic                   Learning Objectives                         Scenario Connections                      Periods
1.1	Understanding    1.1.A Identify common indicators of social     1A Detecting Phishing Messages                  2
     Social                 engineering tactics.                        Read Scenario 1A.
     Engineering      1.1.B Explain how social engineering              Reflect on the questions at the end of
                            tactics influence victims to perform        the scenario.
                            a desired action.
                      1.1.C Describe possible impacts for
                            victims of social engineering attacks.

1.2	Suspicious       1.2.A Identify common signs of a password      1B Detecting Unauthorized Logins                2
     Website Logins         attack.                                     Read Scenario 1B.
                      1.2.B Explain how adversaries take                Reflect on the questions at the end of
                            advantage of weak authentication.           the scenario.
                      1.2.C Explain how to make authentication
                            stronger.

1.3	Best Practices   1.3.A Identify the type of adversary           1C Impacts of Using Public Wi-Fi                2
     for Public             conducting a cyberattack.                   Read Scenario 1C.
     Networks         1.3.B Identify types of wireless                  Reflect on the questions at the end of
                            cyberattacks.                               the scenario.
                      1.3.C Describe actions individuals can take
                            to increase protection of sensitive
                            data when using the internet and
                            Wi-Fi.

1.4	AI-Based         1.4.A Explain how adversaries use              1D AI-Powered Cyberattacks                      2
     Cybersecurity          AI-powered tools to augment                 Read Scenario 1D.
     Attacks                cyberattacks.
                                                                        Reflect on the questions at the end of
                      1.4.B Explain how to protect against some         the scenario.
                            AI-augmented cyberattacks.

1.5	Leveraging       1.5.A Explain how cyber defenders can          1E AI-Powered Cyber Defense                     2
     AI in Cyber            leverage AI-powered tools to protect        Read Scenario 1E.
     Defense                networks, applications, and data.
                                                                        Reflect on the questions at the end of
                      1.5.B Explain how AI-powered tools are            the scenario.
                            enabling faster and more accurate
                            threat detection and response.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents
                                                                                                    UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                     1
TOPIC 1.1                                                                                SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                          1.A


Understanding Social                                                                     Identify, with and without the
                                                                                         support of AI, vulnerabilities,
                                                                                         threats, and attack methods,


Engineering                                                                              and explain how they generate
                                                                                         risk.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  1.1.A                                  1.1.A.1
  Identify common indicators of         Social engineering attacks employ
  social engineering tactics.           psychological tactics to manipulate users into
                                        revealing sensitive information (elicitation),
                                        downloading a malicious file, or clicking on
                                        a malicious link. Social engineering can be
                                        performed in person but is often done by
                                        email, by text message, or through social
                                        media messages.
                                         1.1.A.2
                                        Adversaries often use psychological
                                        tactics like intimidation and urgency to
                                        achieve their goals. Intimidation is when an
                                        adversary threatens a target with negative
                                        consequences if they don’t comply. Urgency
                                        is when an adversary creates reasons why a
                                        target should act quickly.

  1.1.B                                  1.1.B.1
  Explain how social engineering        Social engineering tactics rely on common
  tactics influence victims to          psychological principles that influence human
  perform a desired action.             behavior.
                                         1.1.B.2
                                        Intimidation leverages a natural human
                                        aversion to negative consequences. By
                                        drawing attention to possible negative
                                        consequences, adversaries use fear to incite
                                        targets to act.
                                         1.1.B.3
                                        Urgency leverages a natural human response
                                        to react quickly to time-sensitive needs.
                                        When targets detect a sense of urgency in
                                        a message, they feel pressured to respond
                                        or act quickly, which can prevent them from
                                        taking the time to consider whether an action
                                        is reasonable or safe.


          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents       33
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security



                              1.1.C                          1.1.C.1
                             Describe possible impacts for   Victims may give an adversary personal
                             victims of social engineering   information that could lead to impersonation,
                             attacks.                        such as name, phone number, address,
                                                             workplace, pets’ names, or birthdate. These
                                                             types of information, and information like
                                                             them, are often used on websites as challenge
                                                             questions to verify a user’s identity.
                                                             1.1.C.2
                                                             Victims may give an adversary secure
                                                             information like a one-time password (OTP)
                                                             or authentication login code, which could
                                                             allow an adversary to log in to a service as the
                                                             victim.
                                                             1.1.C.3
                                                             Victims may download malware or click a
                                                             link that that installs malware on their device,
                                                             steals information from their web browser, or
                                                             directs them to a website where their login
                                                             credentials can be captured by an adversary.




34   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                                     UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                      1
TOPIC 1.2                                                                                 SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                           1.A


Suspicious                                                                                Identify, with and without the
                                                                                          support of AI, vulnerabilities,
                                                                                          threats, and attack methods,


Website Logins                                                                            and explain how they generate
                                                                                          risk.
                                                                                           2.A
                                                                                          Identify security controls, and
                                                                                          explain how they mitigate risks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  1.2.A                                  1.2.A.1
  Identify common signs of a            In an online password attack, adversaries
  password attack.                      try logging in to a device or service using
                                        common passwords, common password
                                        patterns, or stolen passwords.
                                         1.2.A.2
                                        Signs of an online password attack include:
                                          § Many failed attempts to log in over a short
                                            duration
                                          § Login attempts at unusual times
                                          § Login attempts from unknown devices

  1.2.B                                  1.2.B.1
  Explain how adversaries               Many people use common patterns when
  take advantage of weak                creating passwords, such as:
  authentication.                         § Starting a password with one or two words,
                                            adding a two-digit number (often signifying
                                            a year), and putting a special character at
                                            the end
                                          § Including the names of family or pets in
                                            their passwords
                                          § Including personally significant dates in
                                            their passwords
                                         1.2.B.2
                                        Adversaries often construct a dictionary
                                        of possible passwords based on personal
                                        information gathered about a target (e.g.,
                                        birthday, anniversary, names of pets and
                                        family) and use an automated tool to submit
                                        potential passwords.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents        35
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security



                              1.2.C                     1.2.C.1
                             Explain how to make        Users should create passwords that are long,
                             authentication stronger.   random, and unique. A password manager
                                                        can be used to generate and store strong
                                                        passwords, or a user may create long, unique
                                                        passphrases for their accounts.
                                                        1.2.C.2
                                                        When creating passwords, users should avoid
                                                        names, dates, or other personally meaningful
                                                        words or numbers.
                                                        1.2.C.3
                                                        When available, users should enable
                                                        multifactor authentication (MFA), which
                                                        will require the user to provide extra proof
                                                        of identity—such as a one-time code—in
                                                        addition to the password as an extra layer of
                                                        security.




36   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                              return to contents
                                                                                                        UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                         1
TOPIC 1.3                                                                                    SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                              1.A


Best Practices for                                                                           Identify, with and without the
                                                                                             support of AI, vulnerabilities,
                                                                                             threats, and attack methods,


Public Networks                                                                              and explain how they generate
                                                                                             risk.
                                                                                              2.A
                                                                                             Identify security controls, and
                                                                                             explain how they mitigate risks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  1.3.A                                  1.3.A.1
  Identify the type of adversary        Adversaries can be classified by their skill
  conducting a cyberattack.             levels.
                                          § Low-skilled adversaries rely on malicious
                                            cyber tools created by others that can
                                            be purchased online. The tools they use
                                            exploit known vulnerabilities.
                                          § High-skilled adversaries have the
                                            capacity to create new malicious cyber
                                            tools or modify existing ones to adapt
                                            to new defensive techniques and tools.
                                            They also have the capacity to discover
                                            undocumented vulnerabilities, known as
                                            zero days.
                                         1.3.A.2
                                        Adversaries have a variety of motivations,
                                        including greed, desire for recognition,
                                        dedication to a cause, revenge, politics, or
                                        beliefs.

  1.3.B                                  1.3.B.1
  Identify types of wireless            In an evil twin attack, an adversary sets up
  cyberattacks.                         their own wireless access point (WAP) with a
                                        service set identifier (SSID) similar or identical
                                        to a target network; the adversary’s network
                                        is called the evil twin. Victims of this attack
                                        could select to unknowingly connect to the
                                        evil twin, allowing the adversary to capture
                                        their network traffic. The adversary cannot
                                        read traffic that uses an encrypted protocol
                                        like HTTPS.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                         return to contents        37
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security



                              1.3.B                            1.3.B.2
                             Identify types of wireless        In a jamming attack, an adversary floods
                             cyberattacks.                     an area with a strong electromagnetic (EM)
                                                               signal in the same frequency range as the
                                                               wireless network, which prevents legitimate
                                                               traffic between the access point (AP) and
                                                               users. This type of attack that prevents users
                                                               from accessing resources is called a denial of
                                                               service (DoS) attack.
                                                               1.3.B.3
                                                               In a war driving attack, adversaries try to
                                                               detect wireless network beacons while
                                                               driving or walking around a target. If a wireless
                                                               signal is detected, the adversary can gather
                                                               information about the type of wireless network
                                                               used and find areas where the wireless signal
                                                               extends outside the physical building.

                              1.3.C                            1.3.C.1
                             Describe actions individuals      Individuals should verify that the name of any
                             can take to increase protection   wireless network they join exactly matches the
                             of sensitive data when using      name of the network they intend to join.
                             the internet and Wi-Fi.
                                                               1.3.C.2
                                                               Most internet protocols are encrypted to
                                                               protect network traffic. However, individuals
                                                               may consider the sensitivity of their data in
                                                               choosing whether to join unencrypted Wi-Fi
                                                               networks to protect vulnerable data such as
                                                               DNS queries.
                                                               1.3.C.3
                                                               Individuals may consider using a virtual private
                                                               network (VPN), which encrypts all their traffic
                                                               to the VPN operator’s system. Although
                                                               this action prevents a service provider from
                                                               viewing traffic, the VPN provider can view the
                                                               traffic.




38   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                       1
TOPIC 1.4                                                                                  SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                            1.A


AI-Based                                                                                   Identify, with and without the
                                                                                           support of AI, vulnerabilities,
                                                                                           threats, and attack methods,


Cybersecurity Attacks                                                                      and explain how they generate
                                                                                           risk.
                                                                                            2.A
                                                                                           Identify security controls, and
                                                                                           explain how they mitigate risks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  1.4.A                                  1.4.A.1
  Explain how adversaries use           Adversaries can use AI-powered tools that
  AI-powered tools to augment           leverage existing voice and image samples
  cyberattacks.                         of a person to create a digital avatar of that
                                        person. The use of these technologies enables
                                        adversaries to impersonate someone over the
                                        phone or even on a video call, which can lead
                                        to financial loss or the sharing of sensitive or
                                        private information. As more organizations
                                        adopt voice-based authentication, the impact
                                        of voice-impersonation has a larger potential
                                        impact.
                                         1.4.A.2
                                        Adversaries can use generative AI tools,
                                        like large language models (LLMs), to create
                                        convincing phishing messages in any target
                                        language. Because traditional phishing
                                        messages are sometimes written by non-
                                        native speakers of the target’s language,
                                        unnatural language is a feature that has been
                                        used to distinguish phishing messages from
                                        legitimate messages. However, with AI tools,
                                        adversaries can now craft phishing messages
                                        in any language that read as though they were
                                        written by a native speaker.
                                         1.4.A.3
                                        Adversaries can craft prompts that extract
                                        secure or sensitive information from LLMs.
                                        Secure or sensitive information in LLMs can
                                        come from user input and the large data sets
                                        used to train LLMs.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents        39
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security



                              1.4.A                        1.4.A.4
                             Explain how adversaries use   Adversaries can publish websites or modify
                             AI-powered tools to augment   existing websites to contain false information
                             cyberattacks.                 so that the false information will be included in
                                                           the training sets for LLMs, causing the LLMs to
                                                           repeat the false information.
                                                           1.4.A.5
                                                           Adversaries can perform reconnaissance on
                                                           a target using AI-powered tools that scan the
                                                           internet to gather information posted on social
                                                           media and public websites.
                                                           1.4.A.6
                                                           Adversaries can use AI-enhanced coding
                                                           tools to help them write new malware, modify
                                                           existing application code to perform malicious
                                                           activities, or to find vulnerabilities in large code
                                                           bases.

                              1.4.B                        1.4.B.1
                             Explain how to protect        Shared secrets with close friends and relatives
                             against some AI-augmented     that can be used to verify each other’s
                             cyberattacks.                 identities should be established. A secret word
                                                           or phrase known only to two parties can be
                                                           used to authenticate identities in high-stakes
                                                           situations.
                                                           1.4.B.2
                                                           Multifactor authentication (MFA) should be
                                                           enabled. If an adversary clones a target’s voice
                                                           to access a system with voice authentication,
                                                           requiring a second authentication factor could
                                                           prevent an adversary from gaining access to
                                                           accounts.
                                                           1.4.B.3
                                                           Personal or sensitive data should not be
                                                           entered into any AI-powered tools, such
                                                           as chatbots or virtual assistants. Some AI-
                                                           powered tools feed user input back into
                                                           the model to provide continuous training.
                                                           Adversaries could extract data that users have
                                                           included in prompts.
                                                           1.4.B.4
                                                           Output from AI-powered tools should be
                                                           carefully evaluated. Verify information from
                                                           AI-powered tools using reputable, stable, non-
                                                           AI-based sources.




40   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                                       UNIT
Introduction to Security
                                                                                                        1
TOPIC 1.5                                                                                   SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                             2.A


Leveraging AI in                                                                            Identify security controls, and
                                                                                            explain how they mitigate risks.



Cyber Defense
                                                                                             3.A
                                                                                            Identify methods for monitoring
                                                                                            systems, and explain how they
                                                                                            detect attacks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  1.5.A                                  1.5.A.1
  Explain how cyber defenders           AI tools can review current security
  can leverage AI-powered               configurations, like firewall rules and access
  tools to protect networks,            controls, and recommend more secure
  applications, and data.               options. Recommendations should always
                                        be checked by a knowledgeable security
                                        technician before being implemented.
                                         1.5.A.2
                                        AI-powered tools can analyze application code
                                        to identify vulnerabilities and recommend
                                        mitigations. Recommendations should always
                                        be reviewed by a knowledgeable programmer
                                        before being implemented.
                                         1.5.A.3
                                        AI-powered tools can suggest rules for
                                        automated detection systems. Detection
                                        rules should always be reviewed by a
                                        knowledgeable detection engineer before
                                        being added to a system.

  1.5.B                                  1.5.B.1
  Explain how AI-powered tools          Of the millions of digital events that happen
  are enabling faster and more          on networks daily, some likely represent an
  accurate threat detection and         adversary conducting malicious activity.
  response.                             Humans cannot carefully examine all those
                                        events to identify the malicious activity.
                                         1.5.B.2
                                        AI-powered tools can be trained to quickly
                                        analyze digital events and sort the events that
                                        are likely malicious activity from those that are
                                        harmless.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                        return to contents        41
      UNIT

       1                  Introduction to Security



                              1.5.B                          1.5.B.3
                             Explain how AI-powered tools    AI-powered tools can be programmed to
                             are enabling faster and more    alert human cybersecurity personnel when
                             accurate threat detection and   likely malicious activity is detected or to take
                             response.                       specific corrective actions based on the type
                                                             of malicious activity detected.
                                                             1.5.B.4
                                                             AI-powered tools enable threat-detection
                                                             and response teams to catch malicious
                                                             activity and intervene quickly to prevent loss,
                                                             harm, damage, and destruction to digital
                                                             infrastructure and data.




42   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
AP CYBERSECURITY


UNIT 2

Securing
Spaces



       ~21
       CLASS PERIODS
UNIT

 2        ~21 CLASS PERIODS


          Securing Spaces
          Developing Understanding
          In this unit, students focus on securing a physical location. Adversaries that can gain
          physical access to a device are often able to bypass many of the technical controls
          that protect the device and the data on it. Thus, securing the physical space is a
          critical first layer of defense and a concrete way for students to develop adversarial
          thinking skills and begin to identify vulnerabilities, threats, attacks, and mitigations.
          Students consider how physical spaces might be breached by adversaries, how to
          detect physical breaches, how to select devices to prevent or deter an adversary,
          and how to place those devices to maximize their usefulness.


          Building Cybersecurity Skills
          This unit focuses on an aspect of security that is concrete and is present in students’
          everyday lives. By leveraging the fact that students move through different spaces
          (e.g., their home, the school building, a bank) that are secured in a variety of ways,
          teachers can connect the concepts of vulnerabilities, threats, and risk to students’
          experiences. Students begin assessing and managing risk in this familiar domain
          while they practice selecting security controls based on the principles from Unit 1.
          Finally, students consider how to select controls to detect physical breaches and
          evaluate the impact of those controls.




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                              return to contents   45
      UNIT

       2                   Securing Spaces



               Unit Scenario
               The scenario for this unit is designed to connect the knowledge and skills
               students gain to realistic workplace tasks. The scenario is paired with relevant
               student activities. Teachers may use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu
               of, the one provided here.


               SCENARIO 2A:
               Securing Xtensr Labs
               You work on the physical security team at Xtensr Research Labs. Xtensr is buying
               a smaller research company in the same town to expand their operations. You
               have been tasked with conducting a physical vulnerability assessment of the
               new lab.
               You will:

                § Review the building plans and current security controls for this new lab and
                  identify physical vulnerabilities
                § Assess the risk from the vulnerabilities identified
                § Recommend physical security controls to mitigate these vulnerabilities
                § Recommend the placement of monitoring equipment to detect physical
                  security breaches




46   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents
                                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                                               2
UNIT AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                      Class
    Topic                    Learning Objectives                         Scenario Connections                        Periods
2.1	Cyber             2.1.A Identify social engineering attacks.                                                       8
     Foundations       2.1.B Identify types of adversaries.
                       2.1.C Describe the phases of a
                             cyberattack.
                       2.1.D Describe the risk assessment
                             process.
                       2.1.E Identify strategies for managing risk.
                       2.1.F Identify types of security controls.
                       2.1.G Explain why a defense-in-depth
                             security strategy is necessary to
                             optimally protect an organization.

2.2	Physical          2.2.A Identify common physical attacks.        2A Securing Xtensr Labs                           5
     Vulnerabilities   2.2.B Explain how threats can exploit             Review physical plans to identify
     and Attacks             common physical vulnerabilities to          physical vulnerabilities.
                             cause loss, damage, disruption, or          Assess the risk from the vulnerabilities
                             destruction to assets.                      identified.
                       2.2.C Assess and document risks from
                             physical vulnerabilities.

2.3	Protecting        2.3.A Identify managerial controls related     2A Securing Xtensr Labs                           4
     Physical                to physical security.                       Recommend physical security controls
     Spaces            2.3.B Determine mitigation strategies for         to mitigate the risks identified in
                             risks from physical vulnerabilities.        Topic 2.2.

2.4	Detecting         2.4.A Identify ways security controls can      2A Securing Xtensr Labs                           4
     Physical                detect physical attacks.                    Recommend the placement of
     Attacks           2.4.B Determine effective placement               monitoring equipment for detecting
                             of security controls for detecting          physical security breaches.
                             physical attacks.
                       2.4.C Apply detection techniques to
                             identify physical attacks.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                return to contents   47
                   UNIT

                    2                   Securing Spaces

     SUGGESTED SKILLS
      1.A
                                        TOPIC 2.1
     Identify, with and without the
     support of AI, vulnerabilities,
     threats, and attack methods,
                                        Cyber Foundations
     and explain how they generate
     risk.
      2.A
     Identify security controls, and
     explain how they mitigate risks.




                                        Required Course Content

                                          LEARNING OBJECTIVE            ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                          2.1.A                         2.1.A.1
                                          Identify social engineering   Social engineers use psychological tactics to
                                          attacks.                      manipulate targets into taking a desired action.
                                                                        2.1.A.2
                                                                        Pretexting is when adversaries create a
                                                                        believable reason to contact a target.
                                                                        2.1.A.3
                                                                        Authority is when adversaries impersonate
                                                                        someone with power over a target or pretend
                                                                        to relay instructions from that person.
                                                                        2.1.A.4
                                                                        Intimidation is when adversaries state negative
                                                                        consequences if demands aren’t met.
                                                                        2.1.A.5
                                                                        Consensus is when adversaries create social
                                                                        pressure by making a target believe everyone
                                                                        else is doing a desired action.
                                                                        2.1.A.6
                                                                        Scarcity is when adversaries create a sense of
                                                                        limited availability.
                                                                        2.1.A.7
                                                                        Familiarity is when adversaries pretend to be
                                                                        or know someone close to a target to establish
                                                                        trust.
                                                                        2.1.A.8
                                                                        Urgency is when adversaries create a deadline
                                                                        that requires quick action by a target to avert
                                                                        negative consequences.




48               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                  return to contents
                                                                                           UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                            2
  2.1.B                                  2.1.B.1
  Identify types of adversaries.        Script kiddies are low-skilled adversaries
                                        who use tools developed by others without
                                        understanding how the tools work. They
                                        are often motivated by greed or a desire for
                                        recognition.
                                         2.1.B.2
                                        Hacktivists are motivated by social, political,
                                        or personal causes. They compromise
                                        computers and networks to support their
                                        cause or stop perceived harm, believing their
                                        goals justify their illegal methods.
                                         2.1.B.3
                                        Insider adversaries are unique threats because
                                        they have legitimate credentials and access
                                        to systems and data. They can be recruited by
                                        malicious third parties and can be motivated
                                        by greed or revenge.
                                         2.1.B.4
                                        Cyberterrorists are motivated by politics or
                                        beliefs and seek to disrupt entire communities,
                                        regions, or nations through cyberattacks (e.g.,
                                        attacking a power grid, water treatment plant,
                                        or other civil infrastructure). They can act
                                        independently or on behalf of governments or
                                        criminal organizations.
                                         2.1.B.5
                                        Transnational criminal organizations
                                        seek financial gain primarily by deploying
                                        ransomware and stealing corporate intellectual
                                        property (IP) to sell in illegal markets.

  2.1.C                                  2.1.C.1
  Describe the phases of a              Cyberattacks aim to disrupt, harm, steal,
  cyberattack.                          or destroy devices, networks, or data.
                                        Adversaries work in phases, which may not all
                                        be used in every attack. The phases are:
                                          i. Reconnaissance
                                         ii. Initial access
                                        iii. Persistence
                                        iv. Lateral movement
                                         v. Taking action
                                        vi. Evading detection
                                         2.1.C.2
                                        In the reconnaissance phase of an attack,
                                        adversaries gather as much information as
                                        possible about their target, often using open
                                        source intelligence (OSINT), which is freely
                                        available information.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                             return to contents   49
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.1.C                         2.1.C.3
                             Describe the phases of a       In the initial-access phase of an attack,
                             cyberattack.                   adversaries establish a foothold on the
                                                            target’s computer, often through social
                                                            engineering or compromised or weak
                                                            credentials.
                                                            2.1.C.4
                                                            After gaining access during an attack,
                                                            adversaries establish persistence to maintain
                                                            access without needing to regain it. They may
                                                            use a command and control (C2) protocol to
                                                            send commands to the device and receive
                                                            output, often through malware like a remote
                                                            access trojan (RAT) or rootkit.
                                                            2.1.C.5
                                                            In the lateral-movement phase of an attack,
                                                            adversaries try to escalate their privileges by
                                                            accessing computers and user accounts with
                                                            elevated permissions to services and data.
                                                            2.1.C.6
                                                            In the taking-action phase of an attack,
                                                            adversaries act on their objectives by
                                                            collecting targeted data, exfiltrating it, and
                                                            disrupting services or destroying data.
                                                            2.1.C.7
                                                            In the final phase of an attack, many
                                                            adversaries try to evade detection by
                                                            removing or editing log files and erasing other
                                                            files they may have planted on devices (e.g.,
                                                            malware).

                              2.1.D                         2.1.D.1
                             Describe the risk assessment   Risk occurs when a threat can exploit a
                             process.                       vulnerability to compromise an asset.
                                                            2.1.D.2
                                                            An asset is anything valuable. Assets include
                                                            financial resources, intellectual property, data,
                                                            digital infrastructure, physical property, and
                                                            reputation.
                                                            2.1.D.3
                                                            Risk assessment considers two factors:
                                                             § The likelihood of an attack against a
                                                               specific vulnerability
                                                             § The severity of the projected damage from
                                                               an attack against a specific vulnerability




50   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                               UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                                2
  2.1.D                                  2.1.D.4
  Describe the risk assessment          The likelihood of a vulnerability being exploited
  process.                              depends on many factors, including:
                                          § The value of the target: Adversaries are
                                            more likely to attack targets they perceive
                                            as valuable.
                                          § The level of skill required to exploit
                                            the vulnerability (i.e., the difficulty):
                                            Vulnerabilities with well-documented
                                            exploits often require less skill and can be
                                            carried out by more adversaries.
                                          § The motivation and capabilities of likely
                                            adversaries: Highly motivated and skilled
                                            adversaries are more likely to be able to
                                            perform more complex exploits.
                                         2.1.D.5
                                        The severity of an attack is often measured
                                        by financial cost, which can also include
                                        reputational and operational impacts.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                        A hacktivist is passionate about illegal fishing
                                        practices supported by a local food production
                                        company. The main webpage of this food
                                        production company would be a high-value
                                        target for this hacktivist; defacing the webpage
                                        to expose the company’s support of illegal
                                        fishing would provide no financial gain to
                                        the adversary, but would allow them to raise
                                        awareness about an issue that motivates them.
                                         2.1.D.6
                                        The result of a risk assessment can be
                                        quantitative or qualitative.
                                          § Quantitative risk assessment assigns a
                                            numeric value to a vulnerability based on
                                            a numeric scale (e.g., 1–10) or quantifiable
                                            impact, which could be financial (e.g., a
                                            $10,000 annual risk).

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                         § Low, medium, high, severe
                                         § Unlikely low impact, likely low impact, unlikely
                                           high impact, likely high impact

                                         2.1.D.7
                                        Risk assessment documentation should
                                        include:
                                          § Vulnerable assets and their value
                                          § Descriptions of likely threats to the assets
                                          § Details of specific vulnerabilities for
                                            specific assets and how they would be
                                            exploited




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                 return to contents   51
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.1.D                          § An explanation of the severity of damage
                             Describe the risk assessment      (financial, operational, reputational, etc.) if a
                             process.                          specific asset were compromised, and the
                                                               likelihood of that compromise occurring
                                                             § A final rating, quantitative or qualitative, for
                                                               each risk identified

                                                            ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                                            § Scaled score (e.g., 1–10)
                                                            § Monetary value (e.g., a $10,000 risk vs.
                                                              a $100,000 risk)

                              2.1.E                         2.1.E.1
                             Identify strategies for        Once a risk has been identified and assessed,
                             managing risk.                 an organization has four options for managing
                                                            that risk:
                                                             i. Avoid
                                                             ii. Transfer
                                                            iii. Mitigate
                                                            iv. Accept
                                                            2.1.E.2
                                                            Risk avoidance stops the activity that is
                                                            generating the risk. If the activity is a critical
                                                            part of an organization’s mission or purpose,
                                                            then avoidance is not possible.
                                                            2.1.E.3
                                                            Risk transference places the burden of the
                                                            risk on another entity, such as an insurance
                                                            company, a government, or consumers.
                                                            2.1.E.4
                                                            Risk mitigation implements security controls
                                                            to reduce the likelihood or impact of a risk.
                                                            2.1.E.5
                                                            Residual risk is the risk that remains after an
                                                            organization has gone through avoidance,
                                                            transference, and mitigation. The residual risk
                                                            is the level of risk that an organization is willing
                                                            to accept. Risk acceptance acknowledges the
                                                            fact that absolute security is unattainable.
                                                            2.1.E.6
                                                            To conserve financial resources and employee
                                                            capacity, an organization will often favor
                                                            solutions that are cost effective and easy
                                                            to implement and maintain. Cost-effective
                                                            solutions cost less to install and maintain than
                                                            the expected loss from an attack.




52   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                            UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                             2
  2.1.F                                  2.1.F.1
  Identify types of security            Security controls address at least one of the
  controls.                             following principles:
                                          § Confidentiality ensures that only
                                            authorized individuals, systems, or
                                            processes can access data. Systems
                                            lacking confidentiality are vulnerable to
                                            data theft or destruction.
                                          § Integrity ensures data are accurate and
                                            trustworthy. Systems lacking integrity are
                                            vulnerable to data manipulation.
                                          § Availability ensures data and services are
                                            accessible to authorized individuals when
                                            needed. Systems lacking availability may
                                            experience unexpected downtime.
                                         2.1.F.2
                                        Security controls can be classified by type.
                                          § Physical controls provide security in the
                                            physical space and include locks, fences,
                                            and cameras, bollards, and security
                                            guards.
                                          § Technical controls provide security in the
                                            digital space and include firewalls, anti-
                                            malware software, and encryption.
                                          § Managerial controls provide rules,
                                            guidelines, policies, and procedures that
                                            specify what security should be in place
                                            and include password policies, regular
                                            access reviews, and incident response
                                            plans (IRPs).
                                         2.1.F.3
                                        Security controls can be classified by function.
                                          § Preventative controls address potential
                                            vulnerabilities with the goal of stopping an
                                            adversary from attacking and include locks
                                            and encryption.
                                          § Detective controls help identify attacks
                                            when they occur and include intrusion
                                            detection systems (IDSs), cameras, and
                                            security incident and event management
                                            (SIEM) systems.
                                          § Corrective controls fix problems and
                                            help restore systems to an operational
                                            state and include vulnerability patching,
                                            repairing a broken card reader, and
                                            intrusion prevention systems (IPSs).




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                              return to contents   53
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.1.G                           2.1.G.1
                             Explain why a defense-in-        A defense-in-depth strategy, or layered
                             depth security strategy is       defense, uses multiple types of security
                             necessary to optimally protect   controls to protect sensitive data and systems.
                             an organization.
                                                              2.1.G.2
                                                              A defense-in-depth strategy allows an
                                                              organization to address different types of
                                                              threats, each with a security control most
                                                              suited to mitigate it.
                                                              2.1.G.3
                                                              A defense-in-depth strategy allows for
                                                              resilience in data protection so when one
                                                              security control is bypassed by an adversary,
                                                              another security control may still prevent
                                                              access to the data or system or limit the
                                                              damage done to the data or system.
                                                              2.1.G.4
                                                              Layers in a defense-in-depth strategy can
                                                              include human, physical, network, device,
                                                              application, and data.




54   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                       UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                        2




  FIGURE 2.1: Defense in Depth
  Defense in depth is a layered security strategy that implements protections
  and deterrence at different levels to make it more challenging for adversaries to
  compromise a computer, network, or data.




         AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                          return to contents   55
                   UNIT

                    2                    Securing Spaces

     SUGGESTED SKILLS
      1.C
                                         TOPIC 2.2
     Evaluate, with and without the
     support of AI, the likelihood and
     impact of risks.
                                         Physical
      1.D
     Document, with and without the      Vulnerabilities
                                         and Attacks
     support of AI, the likelihood and
     impact of risks.




                                         Required Course Content

                                           LEARNING OBJECTIVE         ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                           2.2.A                      2.2.A.1
                                           Identify common physical   Adversaries often use social engineering when
                                           attacks.                   conducting a physical attack.
                                                                      2.2.A.2
                                                                      Piggybacking is the name for an attack
                                                                      where an adversary uses social engineering
                                                                      to manipulate an authorized individual to
                                                                      grant the adversary access to a restricted
                                                                      area. Common piggybacking tactics include
                                                                      carrying something large to entice an
                                                                      authorized person to hold the door open,
                                                                      pretending to be an authorized person
                                                                      who has forgotten their access token, or
                                                                      pretending to be a maintenance person who
                                                                      needs to get into a certain area to perform an
                                                                      inspection or repair.
                                                                      2.2.A.3
                                                                      Tailgating is the name for an attack where an
                                                                      adversary gains unauthorized access to a
                                                                      restricted area by following close behind an
                                                                      authorized individual without that individual’s
                                                                      awareness or knowledge.
                                                                      2.2.A.4
                                                                      Shoulder surfing is the name for an attack
                                                                      where an adversary watches as a user
                                                                      accesses sensitive information so the
                                                                      adversary can use it later. Sometimes
                                                                      adversaries use a camera to record the target
                                                                      accessing the sensitive information for later
                                                                      analysis.
                                                                      2.2.A.5
                                                                      Dumpster diving is the name for an attack
                                                                      where an adversary goes through a target’s
                                                                      physical trash to look for information that
                                                                      could be used to help the adversary reach
                                                                      their goal.


56               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                 return to contents
                                                                                           UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                            2
  2.2.A                                  2.2.A.6
  Identify common physical              Card cloning is the name for an attack where
  attacks.                              an adversary makes a copy of an authorized
                                        user’s access card so they can gain access
                                        to all the resources the user is authorized to
                                        access.

  2.2.B                                  2.2.B.1
  Explain how threats can               Threats include human adversaries seeking
  exploit common physical               to cause harm or disruption as well as natural
  vulnerabilities to cause              disasters. Natural disasters can cause physical
  loss, damage, disruption, or          damage or destruction to computers and
  destruction to assets.                data as well as disruption of digital services
                                        provided by computers.
                                         2.2.B.2
                                        Vulnerabilities are weaknesses or flaws that
                                        could allow an asset to be compromised.
                                        Common compromises include:
                                          § Unauthorized access to sensitive data or
                                            restricted physical spaces
                                          § Disruption of services
                                          § Theft or destruction of digital or physical
                                            resources
                                          § Unauthorized modification of data
                                         2.2.B.3
                                        When adversaries disrupt power to a device,
                                        the device and any services it provides
                                        become unavailable. To disrupt power,
                                        adversaries may damage fuses or breakers
                                        in an electrical box, unplug or cut electrical
                                        wiring, or damage power distribution systems
                                        like substations and transformers.
                                         2.2.B.4
                                        When adversaries gain access to an area with
                                        sensitive information, they can steal or copy
                                        sensitive information.
                                         2.2.B.5
                                        When adversaries gain physical access
                                        to a device and its ports, they can plug in
                                        a keylogger or external drive containing
                                        malware, which could allow them to collect
                                        data from a user or possibly even to gain
                                        control of the device. With direct physical
                                        access adversaries can also physically destroy
                                        a device, making the device itself, any data
                                        stored on it, and any services it provides
                                        unavailable.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                             return to contents   57
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.2.C                           2.2.C.1
                             Assess and document risks        Physical access to devices can allow
                             from physical vulnerabilities.   adversaries to bypass many technical controls
                                                              and layers of security.
                                                              2.2.C.2
                                                              High risks from physical vulnerabilities arise
                                                              when sensitive information or systems
                                                              are exposed in physical spaces without
                                                              sufficiently restricted and controlled access.

                                                              ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                              A server that stores customer data is in a
                                                              room with no lock which is accessed via an
                                                              unmonitored hallway.
                                                              2.2.C.3
                                                              Moderate risks from physical vulnerabilities
                                                              arise when a noncritical or nonsensitive part
                                                              of an organization is left unprotected in a way
                                                              that it could act as a foothold for an adversary
                                                              to gain initial access to other resources.

                                                              ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                              An office has a reception area beyond which
                                                              access is controlled; the receptionist has a
                                                              computer that connects to the office’s internal
                                                              wireless network and the computer has
                                                              exposed USB ports.
                                                              2.2.C.4
                                                              Low risks from physical vulnerabilities arise
                                                              when a vulnerable asset is of low value and the
                                                              vulnerability is unlikely to be exploited.

                                                              ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                              Employees in an office that requires badge
                                                              access have laptop computers that they leave
                                                              on their desks unattended when they all go to
                                                              lunch together. The computers do not contain
                                                              any sensitive information, but there are no
                                                              cables securing the devices to the desks.




58   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                                    UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                                      2
TOPIC 2.3                                                                                SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                          2.A


Protecting Physical                                                                      Identify security controls, and
                                                                                         explain how they mitigate risks.



Spaces
                                                                                          2.B
                                                                                         Determine layered security
                                                                                         controls that address
                                                                                         vulnerabilities.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  2.3.A                                  2.3.A.1
  Identify managerial controls          Organizations should conduct employee
  related to physical security.         security awareness training to educate
                                        employees about how they can contribute to
                                        the organization’s security by:
                                          § Detecting social engineering attempts like
                                            phishing
                                          § Not badging other people into restricted
                                            areas
                                          § Preventing device theft
                                         2.3.A.2
                                        Organizations should have a workstation
                                        security policy that outlines the measures
                                        necessary to protect a physical workplace.
                                        The policy may have tiers of workstation
                                        security based on the type of data handled
                                        at a workstation. Workstation policies often
                                        require:
                                          § Locking devices before leaving
                                            workstations unattended to prevent
                                            unauthorized access
                                          § Clearing sensitive documents off
                                            workstations before leaving them
                                            unattended (sometimes called a clean
                                            desk policy)
                                          § Using a privacy screen filter or other
                                            physical barrier to prevent others from
                                            viewing information on the screen
                                          § Connecting devices to surge protectors or
                                            uninterruptible power supplies (UPS)




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents        59
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.3.B                            2.3.B.1
                             Determine mitigation strategies   To determine a relevant control, a cyber
                             for risks from physical           defender considers how an adversary could
                             vulnerabilities.                  take advantage of a vulnerability to attack a
                                                               system and how to prevent, detect, or correct
                                                               the attack.
                                                               2.3.B.2
                                                               Installing physical controls like fencing, gates,
                                                               and bollards around a building can deter
                                                               adversaries from trying to physically access
                                                               an organization’s buildings.
                                                               2.3.B.3
                                                               Locks on doors, server cabinets, and
                                                               computers can prevent devices from being
                                                               accessed or stolen.
                                                               2.3.B.4
                                                               Card readers can record which employee
                                                               badges are being used to access different
                                                               entries at specific times and deny access to
                                                               unauthorized badges.
                                                               2.3.B.5
                                                               Access control vestibules and turnstiles
                                                               can prevent an authorized person from
                                                               intentionally or accidentally admitting an
                                                               unauthorized person into a restricted area.
                                                               2.3.B.6
                                                               Organizations can disable USB ports to
                                                               prevent external drives from loading malware
                                                               onto a computer.
                                                               2.3.B.7
                                                               An uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
                                                               provides a backup power source for a device
                                                               in the event of a power outage. Organizations
                                                               can also use power generators to provide
                                                               power at a larger scale to a building or set of
                                                               critical devices.
                                                               2.3.B.8
                                                               Organizations prioritize risk mitigations based
                                                               on the severity of the risks and the cost of the
                                                               recommended mitigations.




60   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                                     UNIT
Securing Spaces
                                                                                                      2
TOPIC 2.4                                                                                 SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                           3.A


Detecting Physical                                                                        Identify methods for monitoring
                                                                                          systems, and explain how they
                                                                                          detect attacks.


Attacks                                                                                    3.B
                                                                                          Determine strategies and
                                                                                          methods to detect attacks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  2.4.A                                  2.4.A.1
  Identify ways security controls       Cameras can capture a visual record of an
  can detect physical attacks.          adversary’s malicious activity. The feed from a
                                        camera should be recorded and monitored for
                                        maximum effect. Recordings can be especially
                                        helpful in after-incident investigations.
                                         2.4.A.2
                                        Security guards can monitor activity in an
                                        area and respond to suspicious activity once
                                        detected.
                                         2.4.A.3
                                        Motion sensors can alert security to
                                        movement in an area.
                                         2.4.A.4
                                        Employees that work in a physical space are
                                        often the first to notice the presence of an
                                        unauthorized person and can alert security.

  2.4.B                                  2.4.B.1
  Determine effective placement         When placing cameras, consideration should
  of security controls for              be given to visual coverage, angle, and the
  detecting physical attacks.           ability to be tampered with by an adversary.
                                        Consideration should also be given to what
                                        a camera in a specific area could capture an
                                        adversary doing and how that information
                                        would be helpful. Points of ingress and egress
                                        are often monitored by camera.
                                         2.4.B.2
                                        Motion sensors should be placed in areas
                                        where traffic is unexpected, like server rooms,
                                        or areas where sensitive materials are stored
                                        and few people have access. Motion sensors
                                        in high-traffic areas create many false alarms,
                                        making the alarms less likely to be taken
                                        seriously when there is a real security event.



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents        61
      UNIT

       2                  Securing Spaces



                              2.4.B                          2.4.B.3
                             Determine effective placement   Locks should be placed on all entries to
                             of security controls for        areas containing sensitive information or
                             detecting physical attacks      systems. For areas with particularly sensitive
                                                             information or systems, an organization could
                                                             use an access control vestibule at the entry
                                                             point to prevent piggybacking or tailgating.
                                                             2.4.B.4
                                                             Security guards can be stationary or patrolling.
                                                             Stationary guards can provide constant
                                                             protection for a specific area, entrance, or
                                                             high-value item. Patrolling guards are more
                                                             difficult for an adversary to plan around and
                                                             can create time pressure for an adversary.
                                                             Placing stationary guards at places that funnel
                                                             traffic (e.g., entry gates, main entrances or
                                                             lobbies, and entrances to more secure access
                                                             areas) can be highly effective, while patrolling
                                                             guards are better suited for perimeters and
                                                             exterior areas.

                              2.4.C                          2.4.C.1
                             Apply detection techniques to   Cameras provide visual monitoring and a
                             identify physical attacks.      visual record of activity within a designated
                                                             space. Cameras can be paired with facial
                                                             recognition software that can provide alerts
                                                             when unauthorized individuals enter controlled
                                                             areas. Once a physical breach has been
                                                             detected, defenders can use live and recorded
                                                             camera footage to track an adversary’s path
                                                             and actions.
                                                             2.4.C.2
                                                             Motion detectors work best when paired
                                                             with cameras. When a security alert is
                                                             raised because a motion detector has been
                                                             activated, defenders can use cameras to
                                                             check the space visually and verify a physical
                                                             security breach.
                                                             2.4.C.3
                                                             When employees are required to use an
                                                             electronic badge to unlock a door to a
                                                             restricted area, a sensor can record how long
                                                             the door was open. In reviewing entry logs for
                                                             the door, potential piggybacking or tailgating
                                                             can be detected by doors being open for
                                                             longer than normal lengths of time.




62   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                   return to contents
AP CYBERSECURITY


UNIT 3

Securing
Networks



       ~26
       CLASS PERIODS
UNIT

 3        ~26 CLASS PERIODS


          Securing Networks
          Developing Understanding
          Most digital devices are connected to other devices through a computer network.
          The transmission of data between devices creates new opportunities for adversaries,
          so defenders must think carefully about how networks are designed and how data
          is protected while in transit. In this unit, students learn about common network
          attacks and how to protect against them. Students study the benefits of network
          segmentation and learn how to place and configure firewalls to manage network
          traffic. They also learn how to analyze network log files to find possible indicators of
          compromise (IoCs).


          Building Cybersecurity Skills
          In Unit 3, students learn to apply their risk assessment skills in the domain of
          networking, identifying vulnerabilities and evaluating the likelihood and impact of
          a vulnerability being exploited to determine the risk. Students learn how to apply
          security controls to a network to help prevent and deter adversaries, and how
          to collect and analyze network data to detect attacks. Students also learn how
          automated tools, including AI, enable faster, more efficient detection of malicious
          activity on networks.




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents   65
      UNIT

       3                   Securing Networks



               Unit Scenarios
               The scenarios for this unit are designed to connect the knowledge and skills
               students gain to realistic workplace tasks. The scenarios are paired with relevant
               student activities. Teachers may use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu
               of, those provided here.


               SCENARIO 3A:
               Protecting Patient Medical Data
               You are a network security engineer at Adams County Hospital. Adams County
               Hospital maintains public servers that run a web application for patients to book
               appointments and pay bills and an internal file server that stores patient records
               (see network diagram). You need to determine the best placement for two new
               firewalls to protect these servers and then configure the servers to meet a set of
               specifications.
               You will:

                § Review the building plans and current security controls for this new lab and
                  identify physical vulnerabilities
                § Assess the risk from the vulnerabilities identified
                § Recommend physical security controls to mitigate these vulnerabilities
                § Recommend the placement of monitoring equipment to detect physical
                  security breaches

               SCENARIO 3B:
               Configuring a Secure Wireless Network
               In the aftermath of a natural disaster, as a network technician in the National
               Guard, you have been called up and asked to set up a secure wireless network
               at the local high school gymnasium, which has been converted to an emergency
               shelter, so that those who lost their homes in the disaster can have access to the
               internet to communicate with family and friends.
               There is a satellite link that will provide the access to the internet. Your task is to
               determine the security features necessary to ensure that the network is safe to
               use. Your plan should include measures to detect possible malicious activity on
               the network that would compromise security or performance.
               You will:

                § Describe configurations to secure the wireless network
                § Recommend a collection of detective controls to monitor the network and
                  raise an alert for any potential malicious activity
                § Describe the impact of the detective control recommendations




66   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                 return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                       3
                SCENARIO 3C:
                Protecting a Network on a Naval Submarine
                Submarines are a critical component in a modern navy. Modern submarines have
                sophisticated control mechanisms that are run by computers that communicate via a
                secure network. You are a network technician on a naval submarine, and you manage
                three LANs:

                 § A dedicated LAN for the weapons systems
                 § A secure LAN for official naval operations
                 § A LAN for crew to use for recreation
                You will consider the various levels of security needed for each of these LANs and
                how best to protect each one. Then you will:

                 § Recommend security features for each LAN
                 § Use a diagram to demonstrate the recommended security features




      AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents   67
                 UNIT

                  3                   Securing Networks


     UNIT AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                               Class
         Topic                    Learning Objectives                        Scenario Connections                             Periods
     3.1	Network           3.1.A Identify common network attacks.        3A Protecting Patient Medical Data                    6
          Vulnerabilities   3.1.B Explain how adversaries can                Analyze the current network architecture
          and Attacks             exploit network vulnerabilities to         and determine network vulnerabilities.
                                  steal, disrupt, or destroy network
                                  communication.
                            3.1.C Assess and document risks from
                                  network vulnerabilities.

     3.2	Protecting        3.2.A Identify managerial controls related    3B Configuring a Secure Wireless Network              3
          Networks:               to network security.                       Describe configurations to secure the
          Managerial        3.2.B Configure wireless network                 wireless network.
          Controls                security features.
          and Wireless
          Security

     3.3	Protecting        3.3.A Identify techniques for segmenting      3C Protecting a Network on a Naval Submarine          2
          Networks:               a network.                                 Recommend security features for each LAN.
          Segmentation      3.3.B Explain why network segmentation           Use a diagram to demonstrate the
                                  can increase network security.             recommended security features.

     3.4	Protecting        3.4.A Identify types of network-based         3A Protecting Patient Medical Data                    8
          Networks:               firewalls.                                 Determine the type and placement of
          Firewalls         3.4.B Explain how a firewall uses an             Firewalls A and B within the existing network.
                                  access control list to allow or            Configure Firewall A so that external
                                  deny traffic entering or leaving a         traffic can securely communicate with the
                                  network.                                   web server while blocking other types of
                            3.4.C Determine the effective placement          nonrelevant, potentially malicious traffic.
                                  of firewalls in a network.                 Configure Firewall B so that only employees
                            3.4.D Configure a firewall to manage the         on the internal network can access patient
                                  flow of network traffic.                   records on the file server.
                                                                          3C Protecting a Network on a Naval Submarine
                                                                             Recommend security features for each LAN.
                                                                             Use a diagram to demonstrate the
                                                                             recommended security features.

     3.5	Detecting         3.5.A Identify types of automated             3B Configuring a Secure Wireless Network              7
          Network                 security tools used to detect              Recommend a collection of detective
          Attacks                 network attacks.                           controls to monitor the network and raise an
                            3.5.B Explain how organizations can              alert for any potential malicious activity.
                                  leverage artificial intelligence (AI)      Describe the impact of the detective control
                                  to enhance threat detection and            recommendations.
                                  response.
                            3.5.C Determine a network detection
                                  method.
                            3.5.D Evaluate the impact of a network
                                  detection method.
                            3.5.E Apply detection techniques to
                                  identify indicators of network
                                  attacks by analyzing log files.




68             AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                                return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                       3
TOPIC 3.1                                                                                 SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                           1.C


Network                                                                                   Evaluate, with and without the
                                                                                          support of AI, the likelihood and
                                                                                          impact of risks.


Vulnerabilities                                                                            1.D
                                                                                          Document, with and without the


and Attacks
                                                                                          support of AI, the likelihood and
                                                                                          impact of risks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  3.1.A                                  3.1.A.1
  Identify common network               The address resolution protocol (ARP) is used
  attacks.                              by a default gateway on a network to establish
                                        a table that pairs internet protocol (IP)
                                        addresses with media access control (MAC)
                                        addresses. An ARP poisoning attack is when
                                        an adversary sends falsified ARP packets to
                                        the default gateway to modify the table so
                                        that the adversary’s device receives traffic
                                        intended for the target by linking the target’s
                                        IP address to the adversary’s MAC address.
                                        Faking a MAC address is called MAC spoofing.
                                        This is an example of an on-path attack (or
                                        man-in-the-middle attack), which is when an
                                        adversary interrupts a data stream between
                                        two parties, captures both parties’ data, and
                                        copies or alters the data before sending them
                                        on. Both parties think they are communicating
                                        directly with each other, but instead they are
                                        each communicating with the adversary who is
                                        secretly intercepting their messages.
                                         3.1.A.2
                                        A MAC flooding attack is when an adversary
                                        sends the target switch many Ethernet frames,
                                        each with a different MAC address. This can
                                        force the switch into broadcast mode, and the
                                        adversary can then collect all of the frames
                                        on the network (because they are being
                                        broadcast), which could allow the adversary
                                        to access sensitive information. This is an
                                        example of eavesdropping (or sniffing), which
                                        is when an adversary captures data in transit
                                        and can record and copy the data.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents         69
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.1.A                            3.1.A.3
                             Identify common network           A domain name system (DNS) poisoning
                             attacks.                          attack is when an adversary pretends to
                                                               be an authoritative name server (NS) and
                                                               plants a fake DNS record on a DNS server
                                                               to redirect browser traffic to a malicious
                                                               website designed to steal credentials. This is
                                                               an example of credential harvesting, which is
                                                               when adversaries set up a fake login site that
                                                               looks like a real one. Unsuspecting users enter
                                                               their real credentials, which the adversaries
                                                               capture and use.
                                                               3.1.A.4
                                                               A smurf attack attempts to overwhelm a
                                                               network with Internet Control Message
                                                               Protocol (ICMP) requests. It is a type of denial
                                                               of service (DoS) attack, which makes a system
                                                               or resource unavailable to authorized users.
                                                               During a smurf attack, an adversary sends
                                                               many ICMP requests with the victim’s address
                                                               to the network’s broadcast address. The
                                                               network’s gateway then sends these requests
                                                               to all devices on the network. Each device on
                                                               the network replies to the victim’s address,
                                                               creating a flood of traffic that can block
                                                               legitimate messages. When multiple devices
                                                               attack the same target simultaneously, it’s
                                                               called a distributed denial of service (DDoS)
                                                               attack.

                              3.1.B                            3.1.B.1
                             Explain how adversaries can       Adversaries can send malicious traffic into a
                             exploit network vulnerabilities   network to flood it creating a DoS, to map the
                             to steal, disrupt, or destroy     internal structure of the network, or to spoof a
                             network communication.            legitimate device. Networks without firewalls,
                                                               or with improperly configured firewalls, are
                                                               vulnerable to these types of attacks.
                                                               3.1.B.2
                                                               Adversaries that have compromised a device
                                                               often attempt to leverage their access to
                                                               compromise other devices on the local area
                                                               network (LAN).
                                                               3.1.B.3
                                                               Adversaries that physically plug into a data
                                                               port can gain access to a LAN through the
                                                               switch port unless port security is enabled.
                                                               This allows adversaries to launch DoS attacks
                                                               or perform MAC flooding or MAC spoofing
                                                               attacks.




70   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                              3
  3.1.B                                  3.1.B.4
  Explain how adversaries can           Adversaries standing outside of physically
  exploit network vulnerabilities       secure spaces can pick up the signals and
  to steal, disrupt, or destroy         beacon frames from a wireless access point
  network communication.                that is broadcasting outside the physical
                                        space. This allows them to gather information
                                        about the wireless network and to attempt
                                        eavesdropping and cryptographic attacks
                                        on it.
                                         3.1.B.5
                                        Adversaries can attempt to join networks
                                        to launch attacks from within the networks.
                                        Networks that do not authenticate devices and
                                        users make it easier for adversaries to join.
                                         3.1.B.6
                                        If there is an open network port, an adversary
                                        can plug a wireless access point into the port
                                        creating a rogue access point. The adversary
                                        could use this rogue access point to access
                                        the internal network wirelessly (maybe even
                                        from outside the physical space). This allows
                                        the adversary direct access to the LAN,
                                        bypassing any firewalls.
                                         3.1.B.7
                                        Adversaries can attempt to break wireless
                                        encryption and intercept, steal, or compromise
                                        data on a network.



  3.1.C                                  3.1.C.1
  Assess and document risks             Vulnerabilities on a network can lead to
  from network vulnerabilities.         adversaries being able to intercept and alter
                                        data in transit, launch DoS attacks, or move
                                        laterally on a network to gain access to
                                        more sensitive or critical systems. Network
                                        vulnerabilities can constitute a risk to
                                        confidentiality, integrity, and availability.
                                         3.1.C.2
                                        There are automated vulnerability scanners
                                        that can check networks, devices, and
                                        applications for known vulnerabilities. These
                                        scanners produce a report that often includes
                                        the vulnerabilities detected, their severity, and
                                        mitigation recommendations.
                                         3.1.C.3
                                        Successfully exploiting a network vulnerability
                                        often requires advanced technical ability and
                                        knowledge. This can impact the likelihood of
                                        an exploit.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   71
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.1.C                          3.1.C.4
                             Assess and document risks       High risks from network vulnerabilities allow
                             from network vulnerabilities.   an adversary to easily have a significant
                                                             impact by capturing network traffic, spoofing a
                                                             legitimate device on the network, or launching
                                                             a DoS attack.

                                                             ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                             An organization has a single unsegmented
                                                             internal network that is accessible via a
                                                             wireless network with weak encryption, and
                                                             on that network it has a server running its
                                                             proprietary web-application.
                                                             3.1.C.5
                                                             Moderate risks from network vulnerabilities
                                                             could include vulnerabilities that might give
                                                             adversaries the ability to gain information
                                                             about systems or devices on a network.

                                                             ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                             An organization’s external firewall is not
                                                             configured to block external ICMP traffic.
                                                             3.1.C.6
                                                             Low risks from network vulnerabilities include
                                                             vulnerabilities that would be difficult to
                                                             exploit and would likely have minimal negative
                                                             impacts on an organization.

                                                             ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                             An organization has wireless access points
                                                             that broadcast a beacon frame, which contains
                                                             the network service set identifier (SSID) and
                                                             the wireless encryption protocols.




72   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                       3
TOPIC 3.2                                                                                  SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                            2.C


Protecting Networks:                                                                       Evaluate, with and without the
                                                                                           support of AI, the impact of
                                                                                           protective risk-management


Managerial Controls                                                                        strategies.
                                                                                            2.D



and Wireless Security
                                                                                           Implement and log mitigations
                                                                                           with and without the support
                                                                                           of AI.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  3.2.A                                  3.2.A.1
  Identify managerial controls          A router security policy will set forth a
  related to network security.          minimum configuration standard for routers on
                                        an organization’s network and may include:
                                          § Banning local user accounts (All
                                            router logins must use an approved
                                            authentication server.)
                                          § Disabling unnecessary services (e.g.,
                                            Telnet)
                                          § Requiring a firewall (An organization may
                                            opt for a firewall device separate from the
                                            router.)
                                         3.2.A.2
                                        A switch security policy will set forth a
                                        minimum configuration standard for switches
                                        on an organization’s network and may include:
                                          § Banning local user accounts (All
                                            switch logins must use an approved
                                            authentication server.)
                                          § Requiring port security to be enabled.
                                          § Using MAC filtering
                                         3.2.A.3
                                        A virtual private network (VPN) policy will
                                        detail the minimum security requirements
                                        for employees using a VPN to access an
                                        organization’s internal network, and it may
                                        include:
                                          § A list of roles within the organization that
                                            are allowed to use a VPN to access the
                                            organization’s internal network




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents      73
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.2.A                          § Authentication requirements for
                             Identify managerial controls      employees using a VPN (e.g., public/private
                             related to network security.      key system or MFA)
                                                             § A prohibition against split tunneling (also
                                                               called dual tunneling)
                                                            3.2.A.4
                                                            A wireless security policy will establish the
                                                            minimum security requirements for wireless
                                                            networks within an organization and may
                                                            include:
                                                             § Requiring users to authenticate to the
                                                               wireless network through an extensible
                                                               authentication protocol (EAP) connected
                                                               to an approved authentication server
                                                             § Requiring all wireless traffic to be
                                                               encrypted using AES encryption with a
                                                               minimum key length
                                                             § Disabling beacon frames on wireless
                                                               access points

                              3.2.B                         3.2.B.1
                             Configure wireless network     Organizations can disable beacon frame
                             security features.             broadcasting on wireless access points
                                                            (WAPs) to make it harder for adversaries to
                                                            find their wireless network and learn its basic
                                                            properties.
                                                            3.2.B.2
                                                            Organizations can control the broadcast
                                                            direction and signal strength of a WAP so the
                                                            signal does not extend beyond the physical
                                                            space the access point is meant to cover.
                                                            3.2.B.3
                                                            Organizations should enable strong wireless
                                                            encryption protocols to ensure wireless
                                                            frames are not readable by adversaries who
                                                            might intercept them.
                                                             § WEP, WPS, and the original WPA wireless
                                                               encryption protocols have known
                                                               vulnerabilities and are insecure.
                                                             § WPA3 is currently the strongest wireless
                                                               encryption algorithm.
                                                            3.2.B.4
                                                            Organizations can enable MAC filtering to
                                                            prevent unauthorized devices from accessing
                                                            the network, and they can require users to
                                                            authenticate when joining a network.




74   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                   return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                        3
TOPIC 3.3                                                                                  SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                            2.A


Protecting Networks:                                                                       Identify security controls, and
                                                                                           explain how they mitigate risks.



Segmentation


Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  3.3.A                                  3.3.A.1
  Identify techniques for               Firewall zones and rules can be used to
  segmenting a network.                 create a screened subnet (also known as
                                        a demilitarized zone, or DMZ)—a network
                                        segment that sits between public, external
                                        networks like the internet and internal, private
                                        networks. A screened subnet is typically
                                        is a lower security zone than the internal,
                                        private networks, and it typically holds an
                                        organization’s publicly facing resources,
                                        separating them from the internal network.
                                         3.3.A.2
                                        Subnetting can be used to create different
                                        subnets based on IP addressing. If a device
                                        is compromised by an adversary, subnets
                                        can contain a security breach to reduce the
                                        number of exposed devices.
                                         3.3.A.3
                                        Switches can be used to create VLANs,
                                        which logically separate devices physically
                                        connected to central switches.

  3.3.B                                  3.3.B.1
  Explain why network                   Network segmentation refers to the process
  segmentation can increase             of dividing a network into smaller, isolated
  network security.                     segments or subnetworks (subnets).
                                         3.3.B.2
                                        Dividing a network into smaller subnets
                                        isolates network traffic, which can prevent
                                        attacks on one subnet from impacting devices
                                        on other subnets.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents        75
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.3.B                      3.3.B.3
                             Explain why network         Network segmentation can allow for different
                             segmentation can increase   security policies and controls to be applied to
                             network security.           different segments of the network, allowing
                                                         for higher security zones and lower security
                                                         zones.
                                                         3.3.B.4
                                                         Port security on a switch can prevent MAC
                                                         flooding by limiting the number of addresses
                                                         assignable to any single switch port.




76   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents
                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                               3




  FIGURE 3.3: Screened Subnet (also referred to as DMZ)
  A screened subnet, also known as a DMZ, is a part of a network that is behind a firewall
  but still externally accessible. Screened subnets often contain servers that host web
  applications or websites. Beyond the screened subnet is a second firewall that more
  strictly restricts access to the LAN behind it.




         AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                 return to contents   77
                   UNIT

                    3                 Securing Networks

     SUGGESTED SKILLS
      2.C
                                      TOPIC 3.4
     Evaluate, with and without the
     support of AI, the impact of
     protective risk-management
                                      Protecting Networks:
     strategies.
      2.D
     Implement and log mitigations
                                      Firewalls
     with and without the support
     of AI.




                                      Required Course Content

                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVE                 ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                          3.4.A                             3.4.A.1
                                         Identify types of network-         A firewall is used to allow or deny network
                                         based firewalls.                   traffic in or out of a network. The firewall itself
                                                                            is software that can be hosted on a standalone
                                                                            device or integrated into another network
                                                                            device, such as a router.
                                                                            3.4.A.2
                                                                            A stateless firewall filters traffic based on
                                                                            information in packet headers, such as IP
                                                                            addresses, ports, and protocols.
                                                                            3.4.A.3
                                                                            A stateful firewall (also known as dynamic
                                                                            packet filtering) tracks the state of network
                                                                            connections passing through the firewall and
                                                                            can filter according to connection-related
                                                                            rules in addition to the filtering done by a
                                                                            stateless firewall. This allows for more control
                                                                            over content allowed in and out of a network.
                                                                            3.4.A.4
                                                                            A next-generation firewall (NGFW) has both the
                                                                            capabilities of typical stateless and stateful
                                                                            firewalls and additional advanced features,
                                                                            such as intrusion prevention, deep packet
                                                                            inspection, and filtering by application type.



                                          3.4.B                             3.4.B.1
                                         Explain how a firewall uses an     Network administrators create a set of rules,
                                         access control list to allow or    called an access control list (ACL), that a
                                         deny traffic entering or leaving   firewall uses to permit or deny inbound and
                                         a network.                         outbound network traffic.




78               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                        return to contents
                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                               3
  3.4.B                                  3.4.B.2
  Explain how a firewall uses an        ACL rules are checked in order and the first
  access control list to allow or       rule that matches the criteria will be executed
  deny traffic entering or leaving      for the specified data.
  a network.
                                         3.4.B.3
                                        A typical ACL will specify the direction of
                                        traffic (inbound or outbound), the criterion to
                                        filter by (IP addresses, logical port, service, or
                                        application), and the action to take (permit or
                                        deny).

  3.4.C                                  3.4.C.1
  Determine the effective               Each segment of a network should have a
  placement of firewalls in a           firewall to control the flow of data in and out of
  network.                              that segment.
                                         3.4.C.2
                                        Network segments may have different security
                                        needs based on the data and services within
                                        them. The level of security for each firewall can
                                        be set independently.
                                         3.4.C.3
                                        Each point of data ingress and egress
                                        between the internal network and the public
                                        internet should have a firewall.

  3.4.D                                  3.4.D.1
  Configure a firewall to manage        The requirements for a firewall will specify
  the flow of network traffic.          what type of traffic from which sources or
                                        to which destinations should be allowed or
                                        denied.
                                         3.4.D.2
                                        Specific rules for a firewall can allow or deny
                                        inbound or outbound traffic based on source
                                        or destination port or IP address, service,
                                        protocol, or application.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                         § Allow inbound TCP port 22 from
                                           ALL; (this rule will allow all inbound TCP
                                           traffic with destination port 22, which is the
                                           designated port for the SSH protocol)
                                         § Deny inbound TCP port 80 from
                                           192.168.1.0/24; (this rule will deny
                                           inbound TCP traffic with destination port
                                           80 from IP addresses in the 192.168.1.0-
                                           192.168.1.255 range)




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                return to contents   79
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.4.D                           3.4.D.3
                             Configure a firewall to manage   Rules are implemented in order, and changing
                             the flow of network traffic.     the order of a set of rules can change which
                                                              traffic is allowed or denied. Consideration
                                                              must be given to the precedence of filtering
                                                              priorities when establishing the order of rules.

                                                              ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                                              This set of rules would allow SSH traffic and
                                                              deny other inbound TCP traffic
                                                              § Rule 1: ALLOW inbound TCP port 22
                                                                from ALL;
                                                              § Rule 2: DENY inbound TCP ALL from
                                                                ALL;
                                                              Reversing the order of those rules would deny
                                                              all inbound TCP traffic including SSH traffic.




80   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                                   UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                    3




  FIGURE 3.4: The Process of Firewalls
  A firewall is used to admit or deny traffic entry into a network or host. Firewalls might
  use source IP addresses, destination IP addresses, or logical ports to filter traffic. This
  illustration depicts a firewall controlling incoming traffic. Note that firewalls can control
  traffic into, out of, and within a network.




         AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents   81
                  UNIT

                    3                 Securing Networks

     SUGGESTED SKILLS
      3.C
                                      TOPIC 3.5
     Evaluate the impact of threat
     detection methods.               Detecting Network
                                      Attacks
      3.D
     Detect and classify
     cyberattacks by analyzing
     digital evidence with and
     without the support of AI.




                                      Required Course Content

                                         LEARNING OBJECTIVE              ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                          3.5.A                          3.5.A.1
                                         Identify types of automated     Automated detection tools analyze data
                                         security tools used to detect   collected from an organization’s network
                                         network attacks.                and devices, such as switches and routers,
                                                                         servers, firewalls, and user computers. These
                                                                         data are often collected in a log file.
                                                                         3.5.A.2
                                                                         A network intrusion detection system (NIDS)
                                                                         is an automated tool that analyzes data to
                                                                         determine if malicious activity is taking place
                                                                         on a network. When an attack is detected, it
                                                                         generates an alert.
                                                                         3.5.A.3
                                                                         A network intrusion prevention system (NIPS)
                                                                         is an automated tool that, like an IDS, analyzes
                                                                         data to determine if malicious activity is taking
                                                                         place on a network. A NIPS can also mitigate
                                                                         or halt an attack by closing ports, blocking
                                                                         specific IP or MAC addresses, or rejecting
                                                                         specific protocols.
                                                                         3.5.A.4
                                                                         A security information and event management
                                                                         (SIEM) system collects and analyzes data
                                                                         from multiple sources (including firewalls,
                                                                         NIDS/NIPS, device logs, and application
                                                                         logs) to detect patterns that may indicate a
                                                                         cyberattack and raises an alert if a potential
                                                                         attack is detected. Security analysts
                                                                         investigate the alert to determine whether it
                                                                         represents a true threat and follow standard
                                                                         operating procedures to resolve or escalate
                                                                         the alert.




82               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                               3
  3.5.B                                  3.5.B.1
  Explain how organizations can         Computers log every action that users
  leverage artificial intelligence      take. Firewalls, IDS, IPS, and other network
  (AI) to enhance threat detection      sensors log all the traffic passing through
  and response.                         various points in a network. A medium-sized
                                        organization’s network is logging millions (or
                                        even tens of millions) of data points per day.
                                        Even a large team of humans is incapable of
                                        analyzing so much data.
                                         3.5.B.2
                                        Threat detection teams are creating AI
                                        algorithms to analyze large amounts of data
                                        and classify the data patterns as malicious or
                                        normal.
                                         3.5.B.3
                                        AI models for threat detection are based
                                        on probabilistic calculations; they report a
                                        percentage to indicate the likelihood that
                                        something is malicious.
                                         3.5.B.4
                                        Organizations determine their own thresholds
                                        for what percentage of likelihood of a threat
                                        results in an alert. If the threshold is set too
                                        high, real attacks may go undetected; if the
                                        threshold is too low, the security team will be
                                        overwhelmed with false alerts.

  3.5.C                                  3.5.C.1
  Determine a network detection         Volume of network traffic is a criterion for
  method.                               determining a detection method. Signature-
                                        based detection is more efficient for networks
                                        with high traffic volume. Signature-based
                                        detection compares detection data to a
                                        database of known indicators of compromise
                                        (IoCs), called signatures. Signature databases
                                        must be updated with IoCs for the latest
                                        attacks. Signature-based detection runs more
                                        quickly than anomaly-based detection.
                                         3.5.C.2
                                        Consistency of network traffic patterns is a
                                        criterion for determining a detection method.
                                        Anomaly-based detection is most effective
                                        on networks with consistent traffic patterns.
                                        Anomaly-based detection compares detection
                                        data to a baseline of recorded activity. Baselines
                                        must be recorded on uncompromised systems
                                        to establish expected data types and volumes.
                                        Anomaly-based detection triggers an alert or
                                        action when data types or volumes outside
                                        of a specified tolerance range are recorded.
                                        Anomaly-based detection relies on consistent
                                        patterns in network traffic to detect anomalous
                                        traffic patterns.



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                return to contents   83
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.5.C                          3.5.C.3
                             Determine a network detection   Degree of sensitivity or criticality of a network
                             method.                         is a criterion for determining a detection
                                                             method. Networks with more sensitive or
                                                             critical data or services will likely consider a
                                                             hybrid approach. Hybrid detection combines
                                                             signature-based and anomaly-based
                                                             detection. Hybrid detection is more expensive
                                                             than using either signature- or anomaly-based
                                                             detection alone, and hybrid-detection models
                                                             generate more alerts.
                                                             3.5.C.4
                                                             Likelihood of novel attacks on a network is a
                                                             criterion for determining a detection method.
                                                             Signature-based detection cannot detect a
                                                             new attack. When an organization suspects
                                                             that adversaries are likely to attempt a new
                                                             attack on a network, anomaly-based detection
                                                             is the preferred method when the cost of
                                                             hybrid detection is prohibitively high.

                              3.5.D                          3.5.D.1
                             Evaluate the impact of a        Speed of detection is a factor in evaluating the
                             network detection method.       impact of a network detection method. Faster
                                                             detection enables faster response. Signature-
                                                             based detection methods are faster than
                                                             anomaly-based detection methods, especially
                                                             on networks with high traffic volume.
                                                             3.5.D.2
                                                             Cost is a factor in evaluating the impact of a
                                                             network detection method. Detection tools
                                                             and ongoing costs need to be within a budget.
                                                             Anomaly-based detection systems require
                                                             more expensive hardware to operate than
                                                             signature based. Hybrid detection is the most
                                                             expensive option because it combines both
                                                             anomaly- and signature-based methods.
                                                             3.5.D.3
                                                             False positive rate is a factor in evaluating
                                                             the impact of a network detection method.
                                                             Signature-based detection has almost no false
                                                             positives. Anomaly-based or hybrid detection
                                                             will have higher false positive rates. Impacts of
                                                             high false positive rates include:
                                                              § Time and resources are put toward
                                                                investigating alerts for nonmalicious
                                                                activity.
                                                              § Alert fatigue is a condition that occurs
                                                                when responders get accustomed to false
                                                                positives and take alerts less seriously
                                                                because they assume alerts are false
                                                                positives before investigating them.




84   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                            UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                             3
  3.5.D                                  3.5.D.4
  Evaluate the impact of a              False negative rate is a factor in evaluating
  network detection method.             the impact of a network detection method. A
                                        false negative occurs when an adversary can
                                        bypass a detection system. Signature-based
                                        detection systems are easier to bypass than
                                        anomaly-based or hybrid systems. False
                                        negatives can result in adversaries causing
                                        loss, harm, disruption, or destruction to data
                                        and systems.

  3.5.E                                  3.5.E.1
  Apply detection techniques to         Evil-twin attacks can be detected by regularly
  identify indicators of network        scanning for service set identifiers (SSIDs)
  attacks by analyzing log files.       that look suspicious or similar to local
                                        legitimate SSIDs. Signal triangulation can be
                                        used to locate and disable an access point
                                        broadcasting an evil-twin network.
                                         3.5.E.2
                                        Jamming attacks can be detected by
                                        recognizing that no wireless devices in a
                                        specific physical space are able to connect
                                        to a wireless network and by scanning for
                                        electromagnetic (EM) noise in the wireless
                                        range.
                                         3.5.E.3
                                        ARP poisoning attacks can be detected by
                                        monitoring network traffic for unusual ARP
                                        messages (particularly duplicate MAC address
                                        ARP packets) and checking the ARP table on
                                        the default gateway.
                                         3.5.E.4
                                        MAC flooding attacks can be detected by
                                        monitoring network traffic for an unexpected
                                        surge of Ethernet frames with different MAC
                                        addresses and checking the MAC address
                                        table on a switch.
                                         3.5.E.5
                                        DNS poisoning attacks are difficult to
                                        detect. However, if an organization’s website
                                        experiences an abrupt and otherwise
                                        inexplicable drop in traffic, DNS records should
                                        be examined as a potential cause.
                                         3.5.E.6
                                        Smurf attacks can be detected by watching
                                        network traffic for a sudden increase in ICMP
                                        requests sent to the network’s broadcast
                                        address.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                              return to contents   85
      UNIT

       3                  Securing Networks



                              3.5.E                            3.5.E.7
                             Apply detection techniques to     Network-based IoCs are discovered when
                             identify indicators of network    analyzing network traffic, often in the form of
                             attacks by analyzing log files.   packet capture files. Indicators can be found
                                                               in source and destination IP addresses, ports,
                                                               and protocols. These can include:
                                                                § Connections to known malicious IP
                                                                  addresses
                                                                § Unauthorized network scans
                                                                § Unusual spikes or slow downs in network
                                                                  traffic
                                                                § Mismatched port-application traffic




86   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                               UNIT
Securing Networks
                                                                                                3
                        Signature-Based Detection Technique




                         Anomaly-Based Detection Technique




  FIGURE 3.5: Signature-Based vs. Anomaly-Based Detection Techniques
  Signature-based detection (top) showcases identification of known malware through digital
  signatures, relying on predefined patterns for efficient threat detection. Anomaly-based
  detection (bottom) demonstrates detection of new threats by analyzing deviations from
  normal behavior, identifying potential risks based on abnormal patterns. This enhances
  overall security measures.




        AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                   return to contents   87
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AP CYBERSECURITY


UNIT 4

Securing
Devices



       ~23
       CLASS PERIODS
UNIT

 4        ~23 CLASS PERIODS


          Securing Devices
          Developing Understanding
          Computer devices store, process, and transmit all the digital data in the world.
          Devices include computer systems and laptops, smart phones and tablets, and a
          range of items that have microcomputers installed in them, like washing machines
          and coffee makers—these are often called smart devices or IoT (Internet of
          Things) devices. In Unit 4, students learn about how systems authenticate users of
          devices and how adversaries attempt to impersonate legitimate users. Students
          come to understand how adversaries use malware to compromise devices and
          the importance of keeping devices updated and of using anti-malware software.
          Students also learn how to analyze log files for indicators of compromise (IoCs).


          Building Cybersecurity Skills
          As more everyday items incorporate embedded computers, device vulnerabilities
          and attacks are growing rapidly. In this unit, students learn to assess risk based on
          these new vulnerabilities. They learn how devices can be protected as another part
          of a defense-in-depth security strategy. Students also practice detecting attacks
          against devices by reviewing authentication logs for IoCs.




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                            return to contents   91
      UNIT

       4                   Securing Devices



               Unit Scenarios
               The scenarios for this unit are designed to connect the knowledge and skills
               students gain to realistic workplace tasks. The scenarios are paired with relevant
               student activities. Teachers may use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu
               of, those provided here.


               SCENARIO 4A:
               Designing Secure Connected Farm Equipment
               You work as a security engineer for a company that manufactures internet-
               connected machinery for agricultural purposes (e.g., tractors, irrigation tools, and
               automated milking machines for dairy farms). These machines all have onboard
               computers that allow farmers to remotely control the devices. The computers
               are updated on an as-needed basis. Some of the machines use GPS to locate
               and maneuver themselves.
               There have been reports of cyberattacks against farming equipment, and your
               boss has asked you to write a report detailing possible vulnerabilities with
               suggested mitigations to ensure that the machines your company produces are
               as safe as possible.
               You will:

                § Research how an adversary might take advantage of internet-connected
                  farm equipment, and assess the risk from possible vulnerabilities
                § Determine possible mitigation strategies to help secure the equipment
                § Produce a report for your manager, summarizing your findings and making
                  recommendations

               SCENARIO 4B:
               Configuring Authentication Settings
               You are a junior system administrator at Aceshack, an engineering firm. A new
               desktop computer has been set up in a drop-in area of Aceshack’s office for
               remote workers who are coming in just for the day. This new computer needs the
               security settings configured to comply with Aceshack’s policies.
               You will log on to this computer as an administrator and configure the local
               security settings related to the password and account-lockout policies.


               SCENARIO 4C:
               Analyzing Log Files for Indicators of Compromise
               You are a forensic analyst for Dynamic, a local manufacturing company. Dynamic
               has separate networks for its offices and its manufacturing plants. Last month,
               there was a cyberattack against its business office network, but the adversaries
               were not able to compromise the manufacturing network. However, the security
               team has detected continued suspicious activity on the business network, and




92   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                              return to contents
                                                                                                    UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                                        4
                they are concerned that the suspicious activity may stem from the original attack and
                may eventually lead to the manufacturing environment also being compromised. You
                have been asked to analyze the authentication logs for devices on the manufacturing
                network for signs of adversaries attempting to compromise the manufacturing plant.
                You will:

                 § Review authentication logs for devices on the manufacturing network
                 § Identify any potential indicators of compromise (IoCs)
                 § Submit a report summarizing your findings and recommendations




      AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                         return to contents   93
                 UNIT

                  4                  Securing Devices


     UNIT AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                          Class
         Topic                    Learning Objectives                         Scenario Connections                       Periods
     4.1	Device            4.1.A Identify types of computing devices.     4A Designing Secure Connected Farm               6
          Vulnerabilities   4.1.B Identify the type of malware used in a      Equipment
          and Attacks             cyberattack.                                Research how an adversary might take
                            4.1.C Explain how adversaries can exploit         advantage of internet-connected farm
                                  common device vulnerabilities to            equipment, and assess the risk from
                                  cause loss, damage, disruption, or          possible vulnerabilities.
                                  destruction.                                Produce a report for your manager,
                            4.1.D Assess and document risks from              summarizing your findings and making
                                  device vulnerabilities.                     recommendations.

     4.2	Authentication    4.2.A Explain why hashes (also called          4B Configuring Authentication Settings           5
                                  hash outputs, checksums, message            Configure the local security settings
                                  digests, or digests) are used to store      related to the password and account-
                                  passwords.                                  lockout policies.
                            4.2.B Explain how password attacks exploit
                                  vulnerabilities.
                            4.2.C Determine the type of authentication
                                  used to verify the identity of a user.
                            4.2.D Configure login settings to make a
                                  device more secure.

     4.3	Protecting        4.3.A Identify managerial controls related     4A Designing Secure Connected Farm               5
          Devices                 to device security.                         Equipment
                            4.3.B Explain how anti-malware software           Determine possible mitigation
                                  can make a device more secure.              strategies to help secure the
                            4.3.C Explain why keeping a device’s              equipment.
                                  operating system and software
                                  updated makes it more secure.
                            4.3.D Configure a host-based firewall.

     4.4	Detecting         4.4.A Explain how to detect attacks against    4C Analyzing Log Files for Indicators of         7
          Attacks on              devices.                                    Compromise
          Devices           4.4.B Determine controls for detecting            Review authentication logs for devices
                                  attacks against a device.                   on the manufacturing network.
                            4.4.C Evaluate the impact of a device             Identify any potential IoCs.
                                  detection method.                           Submit a report summarizing your
                            4.4.D Apply detection techniques to               findings and recommendations.
                                  identify indicators of password
                                  attacks by analyzing log files.




94             AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents
                                                                                                     UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                                      4
TOPIC 4.1                                                                                SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                          1.C


Device Vulnerabilities                                                                   Evaluate, with and without the
                                                                                         support of AI, the likelihood and
                                                                                         impact of risks.


and Attacks                                                                               1.D
                                                                                         Document, with and without the
                                                                                         support of AI, the likelihood and
                                                                                         impact of risks.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  4.1.A                                  4.1.A.1
  Identify types of computing           Server computers are devices that provide
  devices.                              one or more services to other computers
                                        (e.g., DNS, DHCP, FTP). Any computer can be
                                        a server, and in an enterprise environment
                                        servers typically have more processing power
                                        and storage than a personal computer.
                                         4.1.A.2
                                        Personal computers are devices that are
                                        designed to be used by one person for work or
                                        recreational purposes (e.g., word processing,
                                        graphic design, web browsing, and media
                                        production or viewing). These include desktop,
                                        laptop, and notebook computers.
                                         4.1.A.3
                                        Handheld computers (also called mobile
                                        computers or information appliances) are
                                        smaller than personal computers and run
                                        on battery power. These include tablets,
                                        smartphones, and wearable technology like
                                        smart watches.
                                         4.1.A.4
                                        Embedded computers are devices that are
                                        part of a machine. Embedded devices have
                                        specific instruction sets for interfacing with
                                        the specialized components of the machine
                                        they’re embedded in. Embedded computers
                                        tend to be slower and cheaper than other
                                        computers and have minimal storage.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents         95
      UNIT

       4                  Securing Devices



                              4.1.A                         4.1.A.5
                             Identify types of computing    Everyday devices with embedded computers
                             devices.                       are often called Internet of Things (IoT)
                                                            devices. Embedded computers are found in
                                                            transportation (e.g., cars, trains, and airplanes),
                                                            devices that operate critical infrastructure
                                                            (e.g., operating circuit breakers at electrical
                                                            substations and pumps at water treatment
                                                            plants), medical equipment (e.g., IV pumps, MRI
                                                            scanners, pacemakers, and insulin pumps),
                                                            and everyday devices like washing machines,
                                                            coffee makers, and thermostats.

                              4.1.B                         4.1.B.1
                             Identify the type of malware   Malware is malicious software that can
                             used in a cyberattack.         damage or destroy a device or network, or
                                                            allow an adversary access to a device and the
                                                            data on the device.
                                                            4.1.B.2
                                                            Malware is often used as a tool to accomplish
                                                            part of an adversary’s plan to achieve their
                                                            ultimate goal(s). There are many types of
                                                            malware, such as:
                                                             § Viruses are malware that must be activated
                                                               by a user executing or opening a file.
                                                             § Worms spread from one computer to
                                                               another without human interaction.
                                                             § Trojans are malware embedded in other
                                                               software that seems harmless. Remote
                                                               access trojans (RATs) provide an adversary
                                                               with remote access to the target system.
                                                             § Ransomware encrypts a device’s files,
                                                               preventing the user from accessing files
                                                               on the device. The ransomware typically
                                                               presents the user with a screen demanding
                                                               payment and promising to give the user
                                                               a decryption key for their files if the user
                                                               pays within a fixed amount of time.
                                                             § Spyware tracks a user’s actions on a
                                                               computer and sends information back to
                                                               an adversary.
                                                             § A keylogger is software or hardware that
                                                               logs the users keystrokes and sends
                                                               the information back to the adversary.
                                                               Adversaries can often extract usernames
                                                               and passwords from keylogger data.
                                                             § Logic bombs are set to trigger their effect
                                                               only when a specific set of conditions
                                                               are met; the conditions can include time
                                                               and date, specific type or version of
                                                               the operating system, character set the
                                                               computer is using, etc.




96   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                              4
  4.1.B                                   § A rootkit is sophisticated malware that
  Identify the type of malware              gets into the target computer’s operating
  used in a cyberattack.                    system and can control nearly every
                                            aspect of the system, including making the
                                            rootkit itself invisible to detection.
                                         4.1.B.3
                                        While most malware is a file or a collection of
                                        files, fileless malware is malicious code that
                                        lives in RAM and uses legitimate programs
                                        already installed on a device to compromise it.

  4.1.C                                  4.1.C.1
  Explain how adversaries               Adversaries can develop exploits for known
  can exploit common device             vulnerabilities in software (including operating
  vulnerabilities to cause              systems). Devices with unpatched software
  loss, damage, disruption, or          are vulnerable to these exploits, which could
  destruction.                          allow an adversary to crash a system, view
                                        user actions, enable or disable various
                                        services or components on the device (e.g.,
                                        turning on a webcam or microphone), or even
                                        take control of the device to issue their own
                                        commands including commands to steal or
                                        destroy information on the device.
                                         4.1.C.2
                                        Adversaries can take advantage of weak
                                        authentication requirements by guessing a
                                        user’s password or using social engineering to
                                        get a user to divulge their password.
                                         4.1.C.3
                                        When systems don’t have a password on the
                                        basic input output system (BIOS) or unified
                                        extensible firmware interface (UEFI), an
                                        adversary can boot a computer into a special
                                        mode (e.g., “recovery mode”) that gives them
                                        higher-level privileges. Without BIOS or UEFI
                                        protection, adversaries can load their own
                                        operating system onto a device from an
                                        external drive and use specialized tools to alter
                                        or create user profiles, including changing
                                        user passwords.
                                         4.1.C.4
                                        Adversaries can load malware onto an external
                                        drive, and if autorun is enabled, then a device
                                        will run the malware when the external drive is
                                        inserted.
                                         4.1.C.5
                                        Adversaries can leverage open ports to
                                        connect to a device.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   97
      UNIT

       4                  Securing Devices



                              4.1.C                         4.1.C.6
                             Explain how adversaries        Adversaries can send malicious data to
                             can exploit common device      devices to disrupt them or attempt to take
                             vulnerabilities to cause       control of them. Devices that have no firewall
                             loss, damage, disruption, or   (or a misconfigured firewall) cannot filter out
                             destruction.                   this malicious data.
                                                            4.1.C.7
                                                            Adversaries often attempt to install malware
                                                            on a device to disrupt or control it. Devices
                                                            lacking anti-malware software are more
                                                            vulnerable to this type of attack.

                              4.1.D                         4.1.D.1
                             Assess and document risks      Risk from device vulnerabilities can come from
                             from device vulnerabilities.   unauthorized access or malware that allow an
                                                            adversary to impersonate an authorized user,
                                                            remotely control a device, encrypt a device’s
                                                            drive to ransom the data, or wipe a device’s
                                                            memory, destroying data or rendering the
                                                            device inoperable. The level of risk varies
                                                            depending on the criticality of the device or
                                                            the services the device provides or data it
                                                            stores.
                                                            4.1.D.2
                                                            High risks from device vulnerabilities involve
                                                            potentially compromising sensitive data or
                                                            critical operations.

                                                            ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                            An organization has not installed the
                                                            most recent update for their email server
                                                            which included a patch for a known critical
                                                            vulnerability.
                                                            4.1.D.3
                                                            Moderate risks from device vulnerabilities can
                                                            arise from weak authentication requirements
                                                            or from vulnerabilities that would be less likely
                                                            to be exploited.

                                                            ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                            A water treatment plant has embedded
                                                            systems controlling pumps. The pumps can
                                                            be remotely accessed via username and
                                                            password for remote management for the
                                                            plant, but the devices do not require multi-
                                                            factor authentication (MFA).
                                                            4.1.D.4
                                                            Low risks from device vulnerabilities are
                                                            typically related to vulnerabilities that, if
                                                            exploited, would have little impact.

                                                            ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                            An employee’s laptop has telnet port 23 open.




98   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                                         UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                                           4
TOPIC 4.2                                                                                     SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                               2.A


Authentication                                                                                Identify security controls, and
                                                                                              explain how they mitigate risks.
                                                                                               2.B
                                                                                              Determine layered security
                                                                                              controls that address
                                                                                              vulnerabilities.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  4.2.A                                  4.2.A.1
  Explain why hashes (also called       A cryptographic hash function (also called a
  hash outputs, checksums,              message digest function) is a mathematical
  message digests, or digests)          algorithm that takes binary data of an arbitrary
  are used to store passwords.          length, processes it according to a set of
                                        instructions, and outputs a fixed-length
                                        binary string called the hash (or checksum or
                                        message digest). Well known cryptographic
                                        hashes include:
                                          § MD5
                                          § SHA-1, SHA-256, SHA-512 (SHA stands for
                                            Secure Hash Algorithm)
                                          § NTHash
                                          § RIPEMD-160
                                         4.2.A.2
                                        An n-bit hash has 2 possible outputs. The
                                                             n

                                        number of inputs is infinite, and so inevitably
                                        two different inputs will produce the same
                                        hash. This is called a collision.
                                         4.2.A.3
                                        Cryptographic hash functions have the
                                        following properties:
                                          § Hashes are collision resistant; it is difficult
                                            to find two different inputs to the same
                                            hash function that produce the same
                                            output.
                                          § Hashes have pre-image resistance; given a
                                            hash, it is infeasible to figure out the input
                                            that generated the hash.
                                          § Hashes are repeatable; the same input will
                                            always produce the same hash.
                                          § Hashes have a fixed length; the length in bits
                                            of the hash for a specific hash function is
                                            constant regardless of the size of the input.



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                          return to contents        99
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices



                               4.2.A                            4.2.A.4
                              Explain why hashes (also called   Adversaries try to compromise hashing
                              hash outputs, checksums,          functions by forcing collisions in their output. If
                              message digests, or digests)      an efficient algorithm exists to force a collision
                              are used to store passwords.      for a specific hash function, then that hash
                                                                function will be deprecated (no longer used in
                                                                secure settings). MD5 and SHA1 are examples
                                                                of deprecated hash functions.
                                                                4.2.A.5
                                                                Password-based authentication services
                                                                shouldn’t store passwords in plaintext,
                                                                so that if an adversary gains access to
                                                                the user:password directory they won’t
                                                                immediately know the passwords for all users.
                                                                Instead, user passwords should be hashed
                                                                and the hash stored in a database. When a
                                                                user enters their password, it is hashed, and
                                                                the hash is compared to the hash stored
                                                                on file. If the hashes match, then the user is
                                                                authenticated.
                                                                4.2.A.6
                                                                If two users had the same password, then their
                                                                passwords would have identical hashes in the
                                                                user:password directory. To prevent this, a
                                                                few random bits (called salt) are hashed with
                                                                a user’s password to generate the hash. Each
                                                                user’s salt is unique, so even if two users have
                                                                the same password they will have a different
                                                                password hash because they have different
                                                                salt.

                               4.2.B                            4.2.B.1
                              Explain how password attacks      If an adversary can compromise the
                              exploit vulnerabilities.          password of a legitimate user, and that user’s
                                                                organization has not enabled MFA or other
                                                                authentication protections, then the adversary
                                                                can act within that organization with all the
                                                                access and rights available to the user.
                                                                4.2.B.2
                                                                Password attacks can be classified as online
                                                                or offline.
                                                                 § Online password attacks attempt
                                                                   user:password combinations in an active
                                                                   authentication portal.
                                                                 § Offline password attacks have captured
                                                                   a user:password database and can run
                                                                   password attacks against the database on
                                                                   their own computer. This method bypasses
                                                                   any account lock out protections that may
                                                                   be in place.




100   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                               4
  4.2.B                                  4.2.B.3
  Explain how password attacks          Many users reuse the same passwords (or
  exploit vulnerabilities.              variations of the same password) for all the
                                        services and accounts they have, despite
                                        warnings not to. When an organization’s user
                                        database is stolen, the usernames, emails, and
                                        passwords are sold to adversaries or posted
                                        online. Adversaries often begin an attempt to
                                        compromise an account by trying stolen or
                                        leaked credentials for a target individual.
                                         4.2.B.4
                                        Many users set passwords that are easy to
                                        guess, and adversaries will attempt to guess
                                        common passwords for a user’s account.
                                        Password spraying is an attack where an
                                        adversary attempts a common password
                                        against many different user accounts.
                                         4.2.B.5
                                        Some services and devices (e.g., switches,
                                        routers, and IoT devices) are preconfigured
                                        with a default administrative user and
                                        password. Credential stuffing is an attack
                                        where an adversary attempts to gain access
                                        to these services or devices using common
                                        default credentials or account credentials that
                                        have been stolen.
                                         4.2.B.6
                                        Offline password attacks use automated hash-
                                        cracking tools to hash possible passwords
                                        and compare them against a captured hash.
                                        Although hashes can’t be reversed, an
                                        adversary can use these tools to hash many
                                        potential passwords and compare them to
                                        the target hash. If an adversary finds a hash
                                        that matches, they can use the password
                                        that generated the hash to login to the user’s
                                        account. Offline attacks include:
                                          § Brute force attacks, where an adversary
                                            uses an automated tool to test all the
                                            potential passwords that a user could have
                                          § Dictionary attacks, where an adversary
                                            uses an automated tool to test a list of
                                            common passwords
                                         4.2.B.7
                                        A rainbow table attack uses a list of common
                                        passwords to generate a rainbow table.
                                        A rainbow table is a table that contains each
                                        potential password and its hash. The table is then
                                        sorted by the hashes, and the adversary uses an
                                        automated tool to search the list of hashes for
                                        the captured hash. If the hashes match, then the
                                        adversary has found a password that generates
                                        the same hash, and the password will allow the
                                        adversary to login to the user’s account.

          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                return to contents   101
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices



                               4.2.C                          4.2.C.1
                              Determine the type of           Authentication mechanisms are technical
                              authentication used to verify   controls that verify the identity of a user to
                              the identity of a user.         ensure that only authorized users access
                                                              a system. The proof the user provides to
                                                              identify themselves is called a factor. Common
                                                              authentication factors include:
                                                               § Something the user knows (knowledge
                                                                 factor)
                                                               § Something the user has (possession
                                                                 factor)
                                                               § Something the user is (biometric factor)
                                                               § Somewhere the user is (location factor)
                                                              4.2.C.2
                                                              Knowledge factors can be passwords, PINs, or
                                                              answers to preselected challenge questions.
                                                              For a knowledge factor to be effective it needs
                                                              to be something an adversary can’t easily
                                                              guess; however, knowledge factors that are
                                                              difficult for an adversary to figure out can also
                                                              be harder for a user to remember.
                                                              4.2.C.3
                                                              A possession factor is an object a user has
                                                              that is unique to them, such as an access card,
                                                              a bank card, a cell phone, or an authentication
                                                              token. The more difficult it is for an adversary
                                                              to obtain the object (or a copy of it), the more
                                                              secure the possession factor is.
                                                              4.2.C.4
                                                              Biometric factors measure features of the
                                                              human body and can include fingerprints, palm
                                                              prints, facial recognition, iris or retina scans,
                                                              or voice identification. Biometric factors are
                                                              difficult for an adversary to duplicate because
                                                              they are unique to an individual.
                                                              4.2.C.5
                                                              Location factors use information about
                                                              Wi-Fi signals, GPS data, time zone settings,
                                                              and even IP address information to make
                                                              determinations about location. Rules can be
                                                              established for allowing or denying access
                                                              based on a location factor.
                                                              4.2.C.6
                                                              Multifactor authentication (MFA) is when
                                                              a system uses more than one factor to
                                                              authenticate a user. MFA is more secure
                                                              than single-factor authentication because
                                                              it requires the user to provide at least two
                                                              separate factors of authentication.




102   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                              4
  4.2.D                                  4.2.D.1
  Configure login settings to           Requiring complexity in passwords is a login
  make a device more secure.            setting that can be configured. When enabled,
                                        users setting a new password must include at
                                        least one character from each character set.
                                        Passwords with characters from each character
                                        set are significantly harder for an adversary
                                        to crack than passwords that use characters
                                        from only one or two character sets. The main
                                        character sets often required are:
                                          § Uppercase letters (A–Z)
                                          § Lowercase letters (a–z)
                                          § Numeric digits (0–9)
                                          § Special characters (!”#$%&’()*+,-./:;<=>?@
                                            [ \ ] ^_`{|}~)
                                         4.2.D.2
                                        Requiring a minimum password length is a
                                        login setting that can be configured. This
                                        means that users must have at least a certain
                                        number of characters in their password. The
                                        longer and more complex a password is, the
                                        longer it will take a digital tool to crack the
                                        password.
                                         4.2.D.3
                                        Requiring a maximum password age is a
                                        login setting that can be configured. When
                                        configured, users will receive a prompt to
                                        change their password a certain number of
                                        days after their last password change, usually
                                        every 90 or 120 days. If a user’s password has
                                        been compromised, changing it could prevent
                                        an adversary from gaining access to the user’s
                                        account. However, some national standards
                                        recommend that organizations not require
                                        users to change their passwords on predefined
                                        intervals to discourage users from developing
                                        password patterns (e.g., PasswordFall2028).
                                         4.2.D.4
                                        Requiring the system to store a certain
                                        number of previous user passwords is a
                                        login setting that can be configured. This
                                        prevents a user from reusing a password.
                                        Many organizations store users’ previous 5–10
                                        password hashes to prevent reuse.
                                         4.2.D.5
                                        Requiring a lockout period after a certain number
                                        of invalid login attempts is a login setting that
                                        can be configured. This prevents an adversary
                                        from continuously randomly attempting wrong
                                        passwords. Many organizations lock a user’s
                                        account after 3–5 invalid login attempts. The
                                        period of the lockout varies.



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   103
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices




                              FIGURE 4.2A: The Cryptographic Hash Function
                              The purpose of a cryptographic hash function is to verify the integrity of data and to
                              show that the data have not been altered. Here, notice that any misspelling, additional
                              text, or changes to the input will completely alter the hash output (also known as
                              the checksum, message digest, or digest). However, any inputs that are exactly the
                              same—such as the first and last, and the second and sixth—result in the same exact
                              digest. The cryptographic hash function is one-way, meaning that a user cannot derive
                              the input from the digest.




104   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                           return to contents
                                                                                          UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                           4




  FIGURE 4.2B: Types of Password Attacks – Password Spraying vs.
  Credential Stuffing
  Password spraying (left) depicts an attack method in which adversaries attempt a few
  commonly used passwords across many accounts to attempt to gain unauthorized
  access, exploiting weak password policies and practices. Credential stuffing (right)
  shows attempts to use common credentials from one service to access other
  accounts, highlighting the risk of using default or common usernames and passwords.




        AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                              return to contents   105
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices




                              FIGURE 4.2C: Types of Password Attacks – Rainbow Table Password Attack
                              The rainbow table (bottom table) contains precomputed hashes for many possible
                              plaintext passwords, sorted alphanumerically. By comparing the hashed passwords
                              from a compromised database (top table) against this table, an adversary can quickly
                              find matching hashes and identify corresponding plaintext passwords. This illustrates
                              the effectiveness of rainbow tables in recovering passwords from unsalted hash
                              databases through hash comparison.




106   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                          return to contents
                                                                                                     UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                                      4
TOPIC 4.3                                                                                 SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                           2.C


Protecting Devices                                                                        Evaluate, with and without the
                                                                                          support of AI, the impact of
                                                                                          protective risk-management
                                                                                          strategies.
                                                                                           2.D
                                                                                          Implement and log mitigations
                                                                                          with and without the support
                                                                                          of AI.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  4.3.A                                  4.3.A.1
  Identify managerial controls          An acceptable use policy will describe the
  related to device security.           range of activities that are permissible,
                                        prohibited, or required by users on devices
                                        owned by an organization and may include:
                                          § Prohibiting users from accessing specific
                                            websites or types of websites (e.g., social
                                            media or gaming)
                                          § Requiring users to keep software updated
                                          § Allowing users to connect peripheral
                                            devices
                                          § Prohibiting users from connecting external
                                            drives or media
                                         4.3.A.2
                                        A password policy will detail the requirements
                                        for user passwords within an organization and
                                        may include:
                                          § A minimum or maximum password length
                                          § A minimum or maximum amount of time a
                                            user may keep the same password
                                          § A prohibition of password reuse
                                          § Rules for password construction (e.g.,
                                            no dictionary words and character set
                                            requirements)
                                          § A suggestion to use secure password
                                            management tools instead of writing
                                            passwords down




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents      107
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices



                               4.3.A                             4.3.A.3
                              Identify managerial controls       A software installation policy will describe
                              related to device security.        what (if any) software users are allowed to
                                                                 install on their devices and usually also a
                                                                 process for users to request specialized
                                                                 software they may need to perform their role,
                                                                 and it may include:
                                                                  § A prohibition against users installing
                                                                    software on their devices
                                                                  § A process for users to request new
                                                                    software needed for their role
                                                                  § A list of approved software for users

                               4.3.B                             4.3.B.1
                              Explain how anti-malware           Anti-malware software (sometimes called
                              software can make a device         antivirus software) has tools to quarantine and
                              more secure.                       remove malware that can corrupt, spy on, or
                                                                 destroy a system. Malware contains indicators
                                                                 that make it detectable; these indicators are
                                                                 called signatures.
                                                                 4.3.B.2
                                                                 Anti-malware software has a database of
                                                                 malware signatures. It periodically scans the
                                                                 files on a device and checks to see if any of
                                                                 the files match any of the signatures in its
                                                                 database. If there is a match, the software
                                                                 quarantines and removes the malicious files.

                               4.3.C                             4.3.C.1
                              Explain why keeping a device’s     When vulnerabilities in operating systems and
                              operating system and software      software are found, the vendor or organization
                              updated makes it more secure.      that maintains the operating system software
                                                                 will fix it and send an update. A small update is
                                                                 called a patch.
                                                                 4.3.C.2
                                                                 Ensuring that a computer’s operating system
                                                                 and software applications are updated to the
                                                                 most recent version prevents adversaries from
                                                                 taking advantage of a known vulnerability.

                               4.3.D                             4.3.D.1
                              Configure a host-based firewall.   Host-based firewalls allow or deny traffic into
                                                                 or out of a single device. This provides an extra
                                                                 layer of security in case a host is connected to
                                                                 a compromised network.
                                                                 4.3.D.2
                                                                 A host-based firewall is software that runs on
                                                                 a device and follows a set of rules (an ACL)
                                                                 like a network-based firewall. Firewall rules are
                                                                 implemented in order, applying the first rule
                                                                 that matches.




108   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                              4
  4.3.D                                  4.3.D.3
  Configure a host-based firewall.      A host-based firewall can also block specified
                                        types of outbound traffic. Host-based firewalls
                                        should always block ports or services not
                                        needed for a given device.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                        A host-based firewall is configured to block
                                        outbound FTP traffic. This prevents an
                                        adversary with remote access to the host from
                                        using FTP to exfiltrate a file to the adversary’s
                                        server.

                                         4.3.D.4
                                        The rules for a host-based firewall can allow
                                        or deny traffic based on source or destination
                                        port or IP address, service, protocol, or
                                        application.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   109
                   UNIT

                     4                   Securing Devices

      SUGGESTED SKILLS
       3.B
                                         TOPIC 4.4
      Determine strategies and
      methods to detect attacks.         Detecting Attacks
                                         on Devices
       3.D
      Detect and classify cyberattacks
      by analyzing digital evidence
      with and without the support
      of AI.




                                         Required Course Content

                                           LEARNING OBJECTIVE              ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                           4.4.A                           4.4.A.1
                                           Explain how to detect attacks   System processes and settings, login
                                           against devices.                attempts, file download attempts, and user
                                                                           actions are logged by computing systems.
                                                                           These logs can be used to reconstruct
                                                                           circumstances leading up to and during a
                                                                           cyber incident.
                                                                           4.4.A.2
                                                                           An indicator of compromise (IoC) is evidence
                                                                           that an adversary has compromised a device
                                                                           or network.
                                                                           4.4.A.3
                                                                           Authentication logs (or auth logs) record
                                                                           every attempted login on a system. Analysis
                                                                           of authentication logs can reveal attempted
                                                                           attacks.
                                                                           4.4.A.4
                                                                           Host-based IoCs are discovered when
                                                                           analyzing logs and configuration settings.
                                                                           Indicators, such as the following, can be found
                                                                           in authentication logs, user activity logs, and
                                                                           system configuration files:
                                                                            § Unusual files being created or modified
                                                                            § Unexpected processes or services
                                                                            § Unauthorized changes to system
                                                                              configuration settings
                                                                            § Unauthorized software installation or
                                                                              update




110               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                    return to contents
                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                               4
  4.4.A                                  4.4.A.5
  Explain how to detect attacks         File-based IoCs are discovered when analyzing
  against devices.                      files on a device. Indicators are usually found in
                                        executable files and can include:
                                          § Files whose hash matches known malware
                                          § File names that are known to be created by
                                            a certain piece of malware
                                          § File paths that are associated with
                                            malicious activity
                                         4.4.A.6
                                        Behavior-based IoCs are discovered when
                                        analyzing logs. Indicators can be found in
                                        authentication logs and access logs and can
                                        include:
                                          § Multiple failed login attempts
                                          § Unusual login times or locations
                                          § Unauthorized attempts to access sensitive
                                            data
                                          § Attempts to elevate user privileges on a
                                            system

  4.4.B                                  4.4.B.1
  Determine controls for                Performance is a criterion for determining
  detecting attacks against a           a detection method. Detection tools use
  device.                               system memory and processing power and
                                        can impact the performance of a device.
                                        Anomaly-based detection tools use more
                                        system resources than signature-based
                                        tools. Signature-based detection is a better
                                        option for devices with less powerful system
                                        resources. Many embedded devices do not
                                        have enough system resources to run any
                                        detection tools on the device.
                                         4.4.B.2
                                        Cost is a criterion for determining a detection
                                        method. Organizations that purchase
                                        detection software need to consider the cost
                                        of purchasing enough software licenses for
                                        the number of devices they need to monitor.
                                        Some organizations purchase an endpoint
                                        detection and response (EDR) service from a
                                        third-party vendor. Although these services
                                        are expensive, they provide a holistic,
                                        unified approach to threat detection for an
                                        organization’s devices; they typically include
                                        a centralized alert platform for monitoring
                                        possible attacks on devices.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                return to contents   111
       UNIT

        4                  Securing Devices



                               4.4.B                            4.4.B.3
                              Determine controls for            Sensitivity or criticality of the device is a
                              detecting attacks against a       criterion for determining a detection method.
                              device.                           Devices that store or process sensitive
                                                                information or provide critical services are
                                                                more likely to be targeted by adversaries and
                                                                benefit from a hybrid-detection model to offer
                                                                maximum protection, when possible.

                               4.4.C                            4.4.C.1
                              Evaluate the impact of a device   Speed and performance are factors in
                              detection method.                 evaluating the impact of a detection method.
                                                                Signature-based detection is faster than
                                                                anomaly-based detection in general, and that
                                                                effect is compounded on devices, which often
                                                                lack the processing power to effectively run
                                                                anomaly-based detection tools. Implementing
                                                                resource-intensive detection tools on devices
                                                                can degrade device performance.
                                                                4.4.C.2
                                                                Phase of the attack is a factor in evaluating
                                                                the impact of a detection method. To carry
                                                                out actions on a device, adversaries must first
                                                                bypass a combination of physical- or network-
                                                                layer protective, deterrent, and detective
                                                                security controls. Detecting and stopping
                                                                an attack at the device level can prevent
                                                                adversaries from accessing sensitive data or
                                                                disrupting critical services.
                                                                4.4.C.3
                                                                False positives versus ease of bypassing
                                                                detection is a factor in evaluating the impact
                                                                of a detection method. Most device-level
                                                                detection tools are signature-based, and
                                                                signature-based detection has a low rate of
                                                                false positives. However, signature-based
                                                                detection is easier for adversaries to bypass.

                               4.4.D                            4.4.D.1
                              Apply detection techniques to     Online password attacks can be detected in
                              identify indicators of password   authentication logs. A single user attempting
                              attacks by analyzing log files.   many wrong passwords is an indicator of an
                                                                online password attack. If a user:password
                                                                hash database has been compromised, all the
                                                                user passwords in the database should be
                                                                considered insecure and all users should be
                                                                forced to reset their passwords.
                                                                4.4.D.2
                                                                If an authorized user is logging in from a
                                                                different location or IP address than expected,
                                                                or at a different time than normal, this can be
                                                                an indicator that the user’s password has been
                                                                compromised.



112   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                           UNIT
Securing Devices
                                                                                            4
  4.4.D                                  4.4.D.3
  Apply detection techniques to         An indicator of password spraying is many
  identify indicators of password       users trying to log in within seconds of each
  attacks by analyzing log files.       other from one IP address or from unusual IP
                                        addresses.
                                         4.4.D.4
                                        An indicator of credential stuffing is a series
                                        of default user:password combinations being
                                        attempted on a device in quick succession,
                                        often from the same IP address.
                                         4.4.D.5
                                        Offline password attacks can’t be detected,
                                        because the attack takes place on the
                                        adversary’s computer.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                             return to contents   113
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AP CYBERSECURITY


UNIT 5

Securing
Applications
and Data


       ~30
       CLASS PERIODS
UNIT

 5        ~30 CLASS PERIODS


          Securing Applications
          and Data
          Developing Understanding
          Data is the foundation of the digital world. Every movie or song that is streamed,
          every website visited, and every financial transaction made online is recorded as
          digital data. Stealing, modifying, or denying access to data is often the end goal
          of an adversary. In this unit, students learn how adversaries commonly attack data
          and applications. Students learn how to set access controls to limit who has what
          type of access to data. They also learn how to use cryptography to protect the
          confidentiality and integrity of data both in storage and while it is being transmitted.
          Additionally, students learn how adversaries attack applications, what to look for in
          logs as evidence of an attack, and some mitigations that can help limit or stop an
          attack.


          Building Cybersecurity Skills
          In this final unit, students practice assessing risk to data and learn about the
          vulnerabilities and attacks particular to data. Students learn why some data are
          more valuable than others and how the perceived value of the data impacts their risk
          assessment. Students also learn how to protect data using tools like cryptography
          and access controls. Finally, students practice detecting attacks on data by reviewing
          logs for indicators of compromise (IoCs).




AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                              return to contents   117
       UNIT

        5                   Securing Applications and Data



                Unit Scenarios
                The scenarios for this unit are designed to connect the knowledge and skills
                students gain to realistic workplace tasks. The scenarios are paired with relevant
                student activities. Teachers may use their own scenarios in addition to, or in lieu
                of, those provided here.


                SCENARIO 5A:
                Protecting Sensitive Data
                As an employee on the security team of Vitahealth Solutions , a pharmaceutical
                company, you have been tasked with protecting the company’s proprietary
                research and development (R&D) on its new product Strype. The directories and
                files that contain the research are on an air-gapped computer. Only members of
                the R&D team and select members of the IT team have access to that computer.
                Your task is to secure the research by setting the access controls for the
                directories and files.
                You will log into the computer that contains the proprietary research and set
                access according to the following criteria:

                 § All members of the R&D team should have full access to the /RandD directory
                   while other users should be able to access and read the directory.
                 § All members of the R&D team should have full access to the /RandD/
                   Research directory while other users should have no access to the directory.
                 § Only the head researcher should have read, write, and execute access to
                   the /RandD/Formula directory, the R&D team should have read and execute
                   access, and everyone else should have no access.

                SCENARIO 5B:
                Sending Encrypted Messages
                You are a security engineer working for LightningGrid, a utility company that
                owns power generating plants across the United States. You are working on
                a classified project with another security engineer at a plant on the other side
                of the country. It is critical that you and your colleague have a method for
                communicating securely. You need to use PGP encryption to set up a secure
                communication channel.
                Your teacher will randomly pair you with another student who will be your partner
                for this scenario, and you will each represent one of the security engineers
                in the scenario. You will use PGP encryption to establish a secure digital
                communication channel with each other.
                You will:

                 § Use a tool to generate an asymmetric key pair
                 § Share your public key with your partner
                 § Send your partner an encrypted secret message
                 § Receive and decrypt a secret message from your partner




118   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                             return to contents
                                                                                                              UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                                               5
UNIT AT A GLANCE
                                                                                                                      Class
    Topic                    Learning Objectives                           Scenario Connections                      Periods

5.1	Application       5.1.A Explain how adversaries can exploit                                                       5
     and Data                application and file vulnerabilities to
     Vulnerabilities         cause loss, damage, disruption, or
     and Attacks             destruction.
                       5.1.B Explain how application attacks exploit
                             vulnerabilities.
                       5.1.C Assess and document risks from
                             application and data vulnerabilities.

5.2	Protecting        5.2.A Explain how the state or classification    5A Protecting Sensitive Data                   7
     Applications            of data impacts the type and degree of        Configure access control settings
     and Data:               security applied to that data.                for directories and files.
     Managerial        5.2.B Identify managerial controls related to
     Controls                application and data security.
     and Access
                       5.2.C Determine an appropriate access
     Controls
                             control model to protect applications
                             and data.
                       5.2.D Configure access control settings on a
                             Linux-based system.

5.3	Protecting        5.3.A Explain how encryption can be used to                                                     4
     Stored                  protect files.
     Data with         5.3.B Apply symmetric encryption algorithms
     Cryptography            to encrypt and decrypt data.

5.4	Asymmetric        5.4.A Determine the appropriate asymmetric       5B Sending Encrypted Messages                  5
     Cryptography            key to use when sending or receiving          Generate an asymmetric key pair.
                             encrypted data.
                                                                           Encrypt a message and send it.
                       5.4.B Explain why the length of a key impacts
                                                                           Decrypt a received message.
                             the security of encrypted data.
                       5.4.C Apply asymmetric encryption
                             algorithms to encrypt and decrypt data.

5.5	Protecting        5.5.A Identify the application security                                                         2
     Applications            principles of secure by design and
                             security by default.
                       5.5.B Explain how user input sanitization
                             protects applications.

5.6	Detecting         5.6.A Explain how to detect attacks on data.                                                    7
     Attacks on        5.6.B Determine controls for detecting
     Data and                attacks against applications or data.
     Applications
                       5.6.C Evaluate the impact of a method for
                             detecting attacks against an application
                             or data.
                       5.6.D Identify whether a file has been altered
                             by verifying its hash.
                       5.6.E Apply detection techniques to identify
                             and report indicators of application
                             attacks by analyzing log files.



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                               return to contents   119
                    UNIT

                     5                    Securing Applications and Data

      SUGGESTED SKILLS
       1.C
                                          TOPIC 5.1
      Evaluate, with and without the
      support of AI, the likelihood and
      impact of risks.
                                          Application and
       1.D
      Document, with and without the      Data Vulnerabilities
                                          and Attacks
      support of AI, the likelihood and
      impact of risks.




                                          Required Course Content

                                            LEARNING OBJECTIVE                ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                            5.1.A                             5.1.A.1
                                            Explain how adversaries           An adversary can read any unencrypted files if
                                            can exploit application and       they have access to the device or drive storing
                                            file vulnerabilities to cause     the files.
                                            loss, damage, disruption, or
                                                                              5.1.A.2
                                            destruction.
                                                                              Computers have standard users and
                                                                              administrative users. Administrative users
                                                                              have access to control system settings and
                                                                              can typically access any files or applications
                                                                              on a system. If regular users are given
                                                                              administrative privileges on a computer,
                                                                              and an adversary can compromise a user’s
                                                                              account, then the adversary will have elevated
                                                                              privileges on the system.
                                                                              5.1.A.3
                                                                              When access control settings are weakly
                                                                              configured, many users often have permission
                                                                              to view and sometimes even edit files on
                                                                              a system. Adversaries can take advantage
                                                                              of weak access control settings to steal or
                                                                              destroy files or disrupt an application.

                                            5.1.B                             5.1.B.1
                                            Explain how application attacks   Applications are programs that run
                                            exploit vulnerabilities.          instructions on computers; they are
                                                                              executable data. Some applications run locally
                                                                              on a user’s computer, while other applications,
                                                                              like web applications, run on a server and are
                                                                              accessed by users through a network.




120                AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                              5
  5.1.B                                  5.1.B.2
  Explain how application attacks       Many applications take user input through
  exploit vulnerabilities.              open-ended input fields where users can type
                                        characters (e.g., letters, numbers, punctuation).
                                        Developers should include user input checks
                                        in their application, such as numeric input
                                        when asked for a number of items, to ensure
                                        that the user input matches what is expected;
                                        the application should reject input outside
                                        of the expected parameters. This process
                                        of verifying that user input meets expected
                                        criteria before processing it is called data
                                        validation. Applications that fail to validate
                                        user input are vulnerable to injection-type
                                        attacks, where adversaries insert unexpected
                                        character strings in input fields to alter the
                                        behavior of a program.
                                         5.1.B.3
                                        Structured query language (SQL) is a
                                        computer language used to request
                                        information from databases and make
                                        changes to databases or entries in databases.
                                        Applications that query a database using
                                        unvalidated or unsanitized input from users are
                                        vulnerable.
                                         5.1.B.4
                                        An SQL-injection attack places SQL
                                        commands and control characters into a user-
                                        input field in an application, which can lead
                                        to a breach of confidentiality by causing the
                                        application to return more information than it
                                        should, or a breach of integrity by modifying or
                                        deleting data in the database.
                                         5.1.B.5
                                        Websites are written using hypertext markup
                                        language (HTML), and many websites use
                                        Javascript to create dynamic content on
                                        websites or web applications. Because
                                        Javascript commands run in the browser of
                                        the user visiting the website, those commands
                                        can access sensitive data stored in the
                                        browser like usernames, passwords, and
                                        cryptographic keys.
                                         5.1.B.6
                                        A cross site scripting (XSS) attack injects
                                        malicious code into a website that a user’s
                                        browser then executes. The malicious code
                                        can be embedded in a link the user clicks (a
                                        Type I or Reflected XSS attack) or it can be
                                        inserted onto a website through a comment
                                        field, forum post, or visitor log, which would
                                        affect any user visiting that website (a Type II
                                        or Stored XSS attack).



          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   121
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.1.B                            5.1.B.7
                              Explain how application attacks   When applications take user input, that input
                              exploit vulnerabilities.          is written to a buffer. A buffer is a designated
                                                                section of computer memory with a fixed
                                                                size. If the amount of data the user enters
                                                                exceeds the size of the buffer, it can overflow
                                                                into adjacent memory locations and overwrite
                                                                other parts of the computer’s memory.
                                                                5.1.B.8
                                                                A buffer overflow attack feeds more data into
                                                                memory than was allotted, which can cause
                                                                a system to crash or to execute code outside
                                                                the scope of a program’s security policy,
                                                                effectively allowing the adversary to perform
                                                                unauthorized actions on a computer, such as
                                                                accessing, modifying, or deleting files.
                                                                5.1.B.9
                                                                The files that run web applications are stored
                                                                in directories on servers. When users access
                                                                web applications, their browsers send GET
                                                                requests using hypertext transfer protocol
                                                                (HTTP). A GET request accesses a file
                                                                somewhere in the filesystem of the server.
                                                                5.1.B.10
                                                                In a directory traversal attack, adversaries
                                                                modify URLs and GET requests to attempt to
                                                                access sensitive data (e.g., usernames and
                                                                passwords) on a server’s file system.

                                                                ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                                A web server stores images for a website it
                                                                hosts in the /var/www/images/ directory.
                                                                An adversary modifies a URL requesting an
                                                                image to ../../../etc/passwd. The ..
                                                                moves one directory up in the file system;
                                                                so the three consecutive .. returns the path
                                                                to the root, and from there the adversary
                                                                is attempting to access the passwd file
                                                                that would return a list of all the authorized
                                                                usernames on the device.


                               5.1.C                            5.1.C.1
                              Assess and document risks         Data security risks can involve a compromise
                              from application and data         of confidentiality when unauthorized persons
                              vulnerabilities.                  can access sensitive data, integrity when
                                                                data can be manipulated or altered from its
                                                                intended state, and availability when data can
                                                                be destroyed or encrypted to prevent others
                                                                from accessing it.




122   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                              5
  5.1.C                                  5.1.C.2
  Assess and document risks             High risks from data vulnerabilities often
  from application and data             involve highly sensitive data (e.g., data that is
  vulnerabilities.                      governed by laws or regulations) that could be
                                        compromised through a highly likely exploit.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                        The company developing the next jet engine
                                        that will be used by the Air Force in its planes
                                        is storing the technical specifications for the
                                        engine on an unencrypted drive.

                                         5.1.C.3
                                        Moderate risks from data vulnerabilities often
                                        involve sensitive data not having strong
                                        enough encryption or strict enough access
                                        controls.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                        A company stores its customers’ PII in
                                        a spreadsheet, and the spreadsheet is
                                        encrypted using a small key.

                                         5.1.C.4
                                        Low risks from data vulnerabilities often
                                        involve less sensitive information being
                                        encrypted with shorter keys or having access
                                        controls that are not strict enough.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                        An organization’s CEO stores his private
                                        memos to his executive staff on a company
                                        share drive that is unencrypted and has no
                                        access controls.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   123
                   UNIT

                     5                 Securing Applications and Data

      SUGGESTED SKILLS
       2.C
                                       TOPIC 5.2
      Evaluate, with and without the
      support of AI, the impact of
      protective risk-management
                                       Protecting
      strategies.
       2.D                             Applications and Data:
                                       Managerial Controls
      Implement and log mitigations
      with and without the support
      of AI.


                                       and Access Controls
                                       Required Course Content

                                          LEARNING OBJECTIVE                ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                           5.2.A                            5.2.A.1
                                          Explain how the state or          Organizations implement specific security
                                          classification of data impacts    controls to comply with legal requirements
                                          the type and degree of security   based on the types of data they collect, store,
                                          applied to that data.             process, and transmit.
                                                                            5.2.A.2
                                                                            Data can be classified by their state.
                                                                             § Data at rest are stored on a drive. It is
                                                                               important to protect the physical drive
                                                                               storing the data from destruction or theft.
                                                                               Data at rest can also be encrypted so
                                                                               that if an adversary steals it, they can’t
                                                                               immediately read the data.
                                                                             § Data in transit are being sent from one
                                                                               device to another. If the data are being
                                                                               transferred over physical media (e.g.,
                                                                               cables) it is important to protect the media.
                                                                               Data in transit can also be encrypted so
                                                                               that if an adversary intercepts it, they can’t
                                                                               immediately read the data.
                                                                             § Data in use are being processed by
                                                                               software or a person. Access controls can
                                                                               be used to limit who or what has the ability
                                                                               to use data in different ways (e.g., view
                                                                               or edit). Data must be unencrypted to be
                                                                               used.
                                                                            5.2.A.3
                                                                            Organizations often categorize data
                                                                            according to their sensitivity and prioritize a
                                                                            higher degree of security for more sensitive
                                                                            information.
                                                                            5.2.A.4
                                                                            Laws and regulations can require certain types
                                                                            of data to be stored, transmitted, and handled
                                                                            according to specific rules.



124               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                              5
  5.2.A                                   § Personally identifiable information (PII)
  Explain how the state or                  is any data that allows someone to be
  classification of data impacts            identified and includes (but is not limited
  the type and degree of security           to): name, signature, phone number,
  applied to that data.                     address, biometric data (e.g., fingerprints),
                                            social security number, date of birth, and
                                            email address. The protection of this data
                                            is covered by many laws but most notably
                                            The Privacy Act of 1974 and for children
                                            under the age of 13 the Children’s Online
                                            Privacy Protection Act of 1998.
                                          § Protected health information (PHI) is any
                                            data related to an individual’s health,
                                            treatment, payment for healthcare at any
                                            time and includes (but is not limited to):
                                            test results, treatment records, hospital
                                            records, doctor visit notes, and health
                                            provider payment records. The protection
                                            of PHI is included in the Health Insurance
                                            Portability and Accountability Act of 1996.
                                          § Payment card information (PCI) is the data
                                            collected by organizations to process
                                            payments via cards (e.g., credit cards) and
                                            includes the following: name, account
                                            number, expiration date, address, and
                                            CVV code. The protection of this data is
                                            regulated by the Payment Card Industry
                                            Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS).
                                         5.2.A.5
                                        Organizations that collect regulated data will
                                        label them and have policies that comply with
                                        the legal or regulatory requirements for the
                                        safe storage, transmission, and handling of
                                        these data.

  5.2.B                                  5.2.B.1
  Identify managerial controls          A cryptography policy will describe the
  related to application and data       acceptable encryption protocols and key
  security.                             parameters for an organization and may
                                        include:
                                          § A list of encryption algorithms approved
                                            for specific uses
                                          § Minimum or maximum key lengths
                                          § Cryptographic key-generation
                                            requirements and parameters
                                          § Cryptographic key-storage requirements




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   125
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.2.B                            5.2.B.2
                              Identify managerial controls      A web application security policy will outline
                              related to application and data   the requirements and parameters for testing
                              security.                         and mitigating web application vulnerabilities
                                                                in an organization, and it may include:
                                                                 § Parameters for when an application is
                                                                   subject to a security assessment
                                                                 § Timelines for remediating vulnerabilities
                                                                   based on level of risk
                                                                 § Parameters for how an application security
                                                                   assessment is to be carried out (e.g., using
                                                                   specific tools or according to specific
                                                                   frameworks)

                               5.2.C                            5.2.C.1
                              Determine an appropriate          Access control enforces which users or
                              access control model to           applications (called subjects) can access,
                              protect applications and data.    modify, add, or remove (called operations)
                                                                which files or applications (called objects).
                                                                Access control models describe how to
                                                                determine which subjects have what type of
                                                                access to which objects.
                                                                5.2.C.2
                                                                Role-based access control (RBAC) assigns
                                                                every subject to a role and defines which roles
                                                                have which types of access to which objects.

                                                                ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                                An example of a role at a company might be
                                                                “accountant,” and one type of object could
                                                                be the payroll software. Role-based access
                                                                could be used to ensure that only subjects who
                                                                are assigned to the role of “accountant” have
                                                                access to the payroll software object.

                                                                5.2.C.3
                                                                Rule-based access control (RuBAC) checks a
                                                                set of rules to determine what type of access
                                                                a subject should have for a specific object
                                                                and then allows or denies types of access
                                                                based on the rules. This access control model
                                                                is typically layered on top of another access
                                                                control model.

                                                                ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                                                There is a rule that prohibits subjects (even
                                                                those who would normally have access) from
                                                                accessing a certain database (the object)
                                                                outside of local working hours. When a subject
                                                                attempts to access the database, even if they
                                                                are authorized to access it, they will be denied
                                                                access if it is outside the time designated by
                                                                the rule.




126   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                              5
  5.2.C                                  5.2.C.4
  Determine an appropriate              Discretionary access control (DAC) gives
  access control model to               individual subjects the ability to set the type
  protect applications and data.        of access that other subjects have on objects
                                        they own. In DAC models some subjects are
                                        designated as administrators or super users,
                                        and they have the ability to override the
                                        access controls established by other subjects.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLE
                                        Bob creates a file (an object) and decides
                                        to give Alice permission to edit the file, to
                                        give Frank permission to view the file only,
                                        and to deny everyone else access to the file
                                        altogether.

                                         5.2.C.5
                                        Mandatory access control (MAC) follows strict
                                        rules for which types of access each subject
                                        level has for objects that are above their level,
                                        at their level, or below their level. Subject
                                        and object levels are assigned by an external
                                        administrator.
                                         5.2.C.6
                                        The Bell-LaPadula model is a MAC model that
                                        is often used by governments and military
                                        organizations to control the security of
                                        information. This model has the following two
                                        important properties:
                                          i. The Simple Security Property states that
                                             subjects may not read objects that are
                                             above their level.
                                         ii. The * (Star) Security Property states that
                                             subjects may not write to objects below
                                             their level.
                                        These rules taken together are often
                                        summarized as “write up, read down” (WURD).
                                         5.2.C.7
                                        The principle of least privilege is the idea
                                        that entities should be given exactly as much
                                        access as they need to perform their function
                                        and no more.

  5.2.D                                  5.2.D.1
  Configure access control              Authorization is when an entity is granted
  settings on a Linux-based             permission to have a certain type of access to
  system.                               a resource. Access controls are put in place to
                                        control which users have what types of access
                                        to which data.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   127
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.2.D                      5.2.D.2
                              Configure access control    There are three types of access to a file in
                              settings on a Linux-based   Linux that can be set, and they always come in
                              system.                     the following order:
                                                           i. Read access allows a user to view the
                                                              contents of a file.
                                                           ii. Write access allows a user to make
                                                               changes to a file.
                                                          iii. Execute access allows a user to run a
                                                               binary file such as a program.
                                                          These are abbreviated rwx, respectively. If a
                                                          user only has read and execute permissions
                                                          (not write), then it would display as r-x. The -
                                                          symbol indicates the absence of that permission.
                                                          5.2.D.3
                                                          There are three default entities for which
                                                          permissions are set and always in this order:
                                                          (1) the file owner, (2) the file group, and (3) all
                                                          other users. The three sets are displayed with
                                                          no spaces (e.g., rwxrwxrwx ).
                                                          5.2.D.4
                                                          To view the current permission settings for
                                                          a file, use the command ls -l , which will
                                                          show the current settings for the default
                                                          entities. If there is a + symbol at the end
                                                          of the permissions, this means that other
                                                          permissions have been set for that file and it
                                                          can be viewed with the getfacl command.
                                                          5.2.D.5
                                                          To modify the permission settings for a file,
                                                          use the chmod command. This command
                                                          can be used with the numeric method or the
                                                          symbolic method.
                                                          5.2.D.6
                                                          To use chmod in the numeric method the
                                                          syntax is chmod ### filename.
                                                          Each of the three ### represents one of the
                                                          three entities mentioned above (the owner, the
                                                          group, other nongroup users).
                                                           § The first # = the owner
                                                           § The second # = the group
                                                           § The third # = other nongroup users
                                                          The permission for each entity is determined
                                                          by adding up the values for the types of
                                                          access to be granted:
                                                           § 0 = no permissions
                                                           § 1 = execute
                                                           § 2 = write
                                                           § 4 = read




128   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                  return to contents
                                                                                            UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                             5
  5.2.D                                 Therefore 3 sets permission to write and
  Configure access control              execute, 5 sets permission to read and
  settings on a Linux-based             execute, 6 sets permission to read and write,
  system.                               and 7 sets permission to read, write, and
                                        execute.

                                        ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                         § The command chmod 750 test would
                                           set the permissions for the owner to read,
                                           write, and execute, for the group to read and
                                           execute, and for everyone else to no access
                                           at all.
                                         § The command chmod 543 test would
                                           set the permissions for the owner to read
                                           and execute, for the group to read only, and
                                           for everyone else to write and execute.
                                         § The command chmod 777 test would
                                           set the permissions for all three entities to
                                           read, write, and execute for the file test.

                                         5.2.D.7
                                        To use chmod in the symbolic method
                                        the syntax is chmod entity +(or –)
                                        permission filename.
                                        The entities are the user owner, the group,
                                        and other nongroup users. Each entity is
                                        represented with a single letter.
                                          § u = user owner
                                          § g = group
                                          § o = others
                                          § a = all
                                        Permission can be either added or removed to
                                        any combination of entities.
                                          § + = add the permission
                                          § – = remove the permission
                                        The permissions that can be set are read,
                                        write, and execute.
                                         § r = read
                                         § w = write
                                         § x = execute
                                        Entities and permissions can be combined in a
                                        single command.
                                        To add the read and execute permissions
                                        for the group and user owner for a file called
                                        testfile, the command would be chmod
                                        ug+rx testfile.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                              return to contents   129
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data




                              FIGURE 5.2A: Access Control Model – Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)




                              FIGURE 5.2B: Access Control Model – Rule-Based Access Control (RuBAC)




130   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                             return to contents
                                                                            UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                             5




  FIGURE 5.2C: Access Control Model – Discretionary Access Control (DAC)




  FIGURE 5.2D: Access Control Model – Mandatory Access Control (MAC)




       AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                 return to contents   131
                    UNIT

                     5                   Securing Applications and Data

      SUGGESTED SKILLS
       2.A
                                         TOPIC 5.3
      Identify security controls, and
      explain how they mitigate risks.   Protecting Stored Data
                                         with Cryptography
       2.D
      Implement and log mitigations
      with and without the support
      of AI.




                                         Required Course Content

                                           LEARNING OBJECTIVE              ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
                                           5.3.A                           5.3.A.1
                                           Explain how encryption can be   The purpose of cryptography is to hide
                                           used to protect files.          information. A cryptographic algorithm defines
                                                                           a process for encrypting and decrypting
                                                                           information. Encryption is the process of
                                                                           hiding the information, and decryption is the
                                                                           process of reversing the encryption to retrieve
                                                                           the original information.
                                                                           5.3.A.2
                                                                           An encryption algorithm defines a process for
                                                                           combining the information to be encrypted
                                                                           with a predefined key. The information to be
                                                                           encrypted is called the plaintext. The output
                                                                           of the encryption algorithm is called the
                                                                           ciphertext.
                                                                           5.3.A.3
                                                                           The number of possible keys that can be
                                                                           used in an encryption algorithm is called the
                                                                           keyspace. The larger the keyspace, the longer
                                                                           it will take an adversary to discover the correct
                                                                           key by random chance.
                                                                           5.3.A.4
                                                                           Cryptographic algorithms are classified by
                                                                           whether they use one key or two keys.
                                                                            § Symmetric encryption algorithms use
                                                                              the same key to encrypt and decrypt
                                                                              information.
                                                                            § Asymmetric encryption algorithms use two
                                                                              different keys—one to encrypt information
                                                                              and the other to decrypt information.




132               AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
                                                                                          UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                           5
  5.3.A                                  5.3.A.5
  Explain how encryption can be         Cryptographic algorithms are also classified
  used to protect files.                by whether they process information one bit at
                                        a time or in fixed-size chunks of bits.
                                          § Block encryption handles information in
                                            fixed-size chunks called blocks, producing
                                            an output block for each input block.
                                          § Stream encryption handles input
                                            information continuously, producing
                                            output one element at a time.

  5.3.B                                  5.3.B.1
  Apply symmetric encryption            Computer-based encryption algorithms
  algorithms to encrypt and             operate on binary data. The most common
  decrypt data.                         symmetric encryption algorithm is the
                                        Advanced Encryption Standard (AES).
                                        AES encryption is used to secure Wi-
                                        Fi transmissions, internet browsing, file
                                        encryption on disks, and hardware-level
                                        encryption on processors.
                                         5.3.B.2
                                        AES is a symmetric key block cipher that
                                        encrypts data in 128-bit blocks (16 bytes).
                                        AES can operate with keys of varying lengths.
                                        Longer keys produce more secure encryption
                                        but require more time to encrypt and decrypt.
                                         5.3.B.3
                                        Symmetric encryption and decryption can
                                        be performed using the command line,
                                        specialized software, or web-based tools.
                                          § On a command line interface, users can
                                            encrypt or decrypt with OpenSSL.
                                          § Specialized software like AES Crypt is an
                                            open source tool that can encrypt and
                                            decrypt files.
                                          § There are many web-based tools for
                                            encrypting and decrypting files.
                                         5.3.B.4
                                        Using OpenSSL in a CLI, a user can encrypt
                                        and decrypt a file using the following
                                        commands (note that the encryption key is
                                        derived from the password provided):
                                          § To encrypt a file named test with AES
                                            using a 128-bit key, use the command:
                                             openssl enc -aes-128-cbc -e
                                             -in test -k password -out
                                             test.enc
                                          § To decrypt the encrypted file using the
                                            same key, use the command:
                                             openssl enc -aes-128-cbc -d
                                             -in test.enc -k password -out
                                             text


          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                            return to contents   133
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data




                       FIGURE 5.3: Symmetric Encryption Algorithms
                       Symmetric encryption involves a single key encrypting and decrypting data. This helps
                       ensure confidentiality between sender and receiver.




134   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                         return to contents
                                                                                                     UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                                       5
TOPIC 5.4                                                                                  SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                            2.B


Asymmetric                                                                                 Determine layered security
                                                                                           controls that address
                                                                                           vulnerabilities.


Cryptography                                                                               2.D
                                                                                           Implement and log mitigations
                                                                                           with and without the support
                                                                                           of AI.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  5.4.A                                  5.4.A.1
  Determine the appropriate             Asymmetric encryption allows users to
  asymmetric key to use when            communicate securely without prearranging a
  sending or receiving encrypted        shared secret key.
  data.
                                         5.4.A.2
                                        When using asymmetric encryption, each
                                        entity that will be receiving data must first
                                        generate a key pair. Key pairs are binary
                                        strings of equal length that are generated
                                        at the same time through a mathematical
                                        process. One key is designated as the public
                                        key and the other as the private key. The keys
                                        are mathematical inverses of each other—
                                        each key reverses its partner. Either key can
                                        be used to encrypt information, but only the
                                        other key in the key pair will then be able to
                                        decrypt it.
                                         5.4.A.3
                                        Once the receiver generates the key pair,
                                        the private key must be stored securely. If
                                        the private key is exposed, shared, stolen,
                                        corrupted, or compromised the key pair
                                        must be deleted and a new key pair must
                                        be generated, because the security of the
                                        encryption algorithm rests on the security of
                                        the private key. The public key is published for
                                        anyone to view and use.
                                         5.4.A.4
                                        To send information securely to someone, the
                                        sender will use the receiver’s public key to
                                        encrypt the data and send it. Only the receiver
                                        who has the private key will be able to decrypt
                                        and read the information.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents      135
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.4.B                        5.4.B.1
                              Explain why the length of a   Longer keys result in larger keyspaces.
                              key impacts the security of   For binary keys, an n-bit length key has a
                              encrypted data.               keyspace of 2 .
                                                                          n


                                                            5.4.B.2
                                                            Using an application to randomly guess an
                                                            n-bit length encryption key means that on
                                                            average an adversary will be able to guess the
                                                            correct key in 2 /2 or 2 guesses.
                                                                            n       n−1



                                                            5.4.B.3
                                                            Although longer keys are more secure, they
                                                            also require more time to encrypt and decrypt
                                                            messages.
                                                            5.4.B.4
                                                            Computational processing power and
                                                            efficiency continue to improve, allowing
                                                            software to guess keys faster. Key-length
                                                            recommendations for both symmetric
                                                            and asymmetric encryption algorithms
                                                            are periodically increased to account for
                                                            increased processing power.
                                                            5.4.B.5
                                                            Key-length comparison is only valid when
                                                            comparing keys for the same cryptographic
                                                            algorithm.

                                                            ILLUSTRATIVE EXAMPLES
                                                            § An AES 256-bit key is more secure than an
                                                              AES 128-bit key.
                                                            § An RSA 4096-bit key is more secure than an
                                                              RSA 2048-bit key.
                                                            § RSA and AES keys cannot be directly
                                                              compared to one another in determining the
                                                              level of security.



                               5.4.C                        5.4.C.1
                              Apply asymmetric encryption   Common asymmetric encryption algorithms
                              algorithms to encrypt and     include RSA and elliptic curve cryptography
                              decrypt data.                 (ECC). Asymmetric algorithms are used in
                                                            many applications, including digital signatures
                                                            and digital certificates.




136   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                 return to contents
                                                                                         UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                          5
  5.4.C                                  5.4.C.2
  Apply asymmetric encryption           As with symmetric encryption, asymmetric
  algorithms to encrypt and             encryption and decryption can be performed
  decrypt data.                         using the command line, specialized software,
                                        or web-based tools.
                                          § On a command line interface, users can
                                            encrypt or decrypt with OpenSSL.
                                          § Specialized software like RSA Encryption
                                            Tool is an open source tool that can
                                            encrypt and decrypt files.
                                          § There are many web-based tools for
                                            encrypting and decrypting files.
                                         5.4.C.3
                                        In a CLI, a user can generate an asymmetric
                                        key pair and encrypt or decrypt files as
                                        necessary.
                                          § To generate a 2048-bit RSA key pair and
                                            save the key to a file named rsa.pem use
                                            the command:
                                            openssl genrsa -out rsa.pem
                                            2048
                                          § To extract the public key from rsa.pem
                                            into a file named public.pem, use the
                                             command:
                                            openssl rsa -pubout -in rsa.
                                            pem -outform PEM -out public.
                                            pem
                                          § To encrypt the file test using RSA
                                            encryption and the key file public.pem,
                                             use the command:
                                            openssl pkeyutl -encrypt
                                            -pubin -inkey public.pem -in
                                            test -out test.enc
                                          § To decrypt the test.enc file using the
                                            rsa.pem file, run the command:
                                            openssl pkeyutl -decrypt
                                            -inkey rsa.pem -in test.enc
                                            -out test




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                           return to contents   137
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data




                              FIGURE 5.4: Asymmetric Encryption Algorithms
                              Asymmetric encryption involves two keys: a public and a private key. In this
                              encryption method, data encrypted with the public key can only be decrypted by
                              the corresponding private key. This helps ensure secure communication and data
                              integrity.




138   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                                        UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                                          5
TOPIC 5.5                                                                                    SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                              2.A


Protecting                                                                                   Identify security controls, and
                                                                                             explain how they mitigate risks.



Applications


Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  5.5.A                                  5.5.A.1
  Identify the application security     Secure by design is an initiative that
  principles of secure by design        encourages companies to include security in
  and security by default.              all phases of product development including
                                        design. When organizations implement secure
                                        by design, security is a design principle not
                                        just a technical feature.
                                         5.5.A.2
                                        Secure by design includes three design
                                        principles:
                                          i. Companies should take ownership of
                                             customer security outcomes. Companies
                                             should build products that meet the
                                             security needs of their customers.
                                         ii. Companies should embrace radical
                                             transparency and accountability. Sharing
                                             relevant security-related product news
                                             and updates quickly increases security for
                                             everyone.
                                        iii. Companies should build organizational
                                             structure and leadership to implement
                                             secure by design. Companies need leaders
                                             who are focused on security and have a
                                             security-first posture.
                                         5.5.A.3
                                        Secure by design includes the concept of
                                        secure by default, which is the idea that security
                                        features for software and devices should be
                                        enabled by default. Devices and software should
                                        be secure to use out of the box, with security
                                        features already enabled.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                         return to contents        139
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.5.B                   5.5.B.1
                              Explain how user input   When users enter input into an application,
                              sanitization protects    the application typically encases that input
                              applications.            in special characters to process it. The
                                                       characters that encase the user input are
                                                       called control characters and include the
                                                       single quote, the double quote, and the
                                                       semicolon.
                                                       5.5.B.2
                                                       When creating a program that takes user input,
                                                       programmers should use a function to verify
                                                       that user input meets their expected criteria
                                                       and does not include any control characters
                                                       that could be used to manipulate the system.
                                                       This verification function can sanitize user
                                                       input by removing potentially malicious
                                                       characters, or it can give the user an error and
                                                       force the user to provide different input. This
                                                       can protect against many application attacks,
                                                       including:
                                                        § SQL injection attacks
                                                        § XSS attacks
                                                        § Directory traversal attacks




140   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                            return to contents
                                                                                                      UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                                       5
TOPIC 5.6                                                                                  SUGGESTED SKILLS
                                                                                            3.B


Detecting Attacks on                                                                       Determine strategies and
                                                                                           methods to detect attacks.



Data and Applications
                                                                                            3.D
                                                                                           Detect and classify
                                                                                           cyberattacks by analyzing
                                                                                           digital evidence with and
                                                                                           without the support of AI.




Required Course Content

  LEARNING OBJECTIVE                    ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE
  5.6.A                                  5.6.A.1
  Explain how to detect attacks         Devices track and log when data are accessed
  on data.                              and by whom. The process of recording and
                                        monitoring user activities is called accounting.
                                        Analysis of these logs can reveal malicious
                                        activity when an adversary attempts to
                                        access, copy, move, or delete data. Suspicious
                                        activity can include:
                                          § Accessing files that aren’t typically
                                            accessed
                                          § Accessing files or applications outside of
                                            a user’s normal patterns (including time of
                                            day, location, and device type)
                                          § Attempts to delete or copy sensitive files
                                         5.6.A.2
                                        A honeypot is a file that appears as if it
                                        contains valuable data (e.g., credit card
                                        information, PII, passwords), but the data in
                                        the file are fake. A system can alert defenders
                                        if someone attempts to access the honeypot.
                                        Since the honeypot is a fake file, there is no
                                        legitimate reason to be accessing it, and any
                                        attempted access would be an indicator of
                                        malicious activity.
                                         5.6.A.3
                                        Cryptographic hash functions can generate
                                        a digest for data and can reveal if data
                                        have been altered. If a file has changed
                                        unexpectedly, this can be a sign of malicious
                                        activity.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                      return to contents   141
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.6.B                            5.6.B.1
                              Determine controls for            Cost is a criterion in determining detective
                              detecting attacks against         controls. Detective controls like honeypots
                              applications or data.             and using hash values to check data integrity
                                                                are inexpensive. Some organizations invest
                                                                in third-party data loss prevention (DLP)
                                                                services, which monitor data access, usage,
                                                                and transmission by users throughout the
                                                                organization to detect suspicious activity; DLP
                                                                services provide strong detection capabilities
                                                                at a higher cost.
                                                                5.6.B.2
                                                                Sensitivity or criticality of data or applications
                                                                is a criterion in determining detective controls.
                                                                More sensitive or critical data or applications
                                                                are more likely targets of an adversary and
                                                                should be monitored more closely.
                                                                5.6.B.3
                                                                Classification of data is a criterion in
                                                                determining detective controls. Data that
                                                                have been classified as private, educational,
                                                                healthcare, or financial often have legal
                                                                or regulatory detection and monitoring
                                                                requirements.

                               5.6.C                            5.6.C.1
                              Evaluate the impact of a          To operate at an effective speed, log
                              method for detecting attacks      analysis needs to be augmented with
                              against an application or data.   some automation. Honeypots offer near
                                                                instantaneous detection capabilities.
                                                                5.6.C.2
                                                                Some DLP tools, honeypots, and realtime
                                                                automated log analysis provide alerts as an
                                                                attack is happening. These tools allow for
                                                                a prompt response that can stop an attack
                                                                before it does more harm. Retrospective log
                                                                analysis and the use of cryptographic hashes
                                                                to verify data integrity identify attacks after
                                                                they have occurred.
                                                                5.6.C.3
                                                                False negatives can occur in applications and
                                                                data attack detection. Cryptographic hash
                                                                functions only detect if data have been altered.
                                                                An adversary could view and steal data
                                                                without altering it, and a cryptographic hash
                                                                function would not detect this. Honeypots
                                                                cannot detect adversaries that do not attempt
                                                                to access them.




142   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                       return to contents
                                                                                             UNIT
Securing Applications and Data
                                                                                              5
  5.6.D                                  5.6.D.1
  Identify whether a file has been      Cryptographic hash functions can help
  altered by verifying its hash.        identify changes in a file because they are
                                        repeatable: the same input always produces
                                        the same output for a given hash function.
                                         5.6.D.2
                                        Hashes can be calculated using the command
                                        line on a computer, a website, or specialized
                                        software.
                                          § In Windows Powershell, if a user wanted
                                            to generate the SHA256 hash for a file
                                            named testfile, they would use the
                                            command:
                                             Get-FileHash testfile
                                             -Algorithm SHA256
                                          § In BASH the same could be accomplished
                                            with the command:
                                             sha256sum testfile
                                          § In zsh, the common command line terminal
                                            on Apple computers, this could be
                                            accomplished with the command:
                                             shasum -a 256 testfile
                                         5.6.D.3
                                        A file can be hashed and its hash output
                                        recorded. Then it can be hashed again later,
                                        and the second hash output can be compared
                                        to the previous hash output for the same file. If
                                        a file’s hash changes, then the file was altered
                                        between when the first and second hashes
                                        were generated.


  5.6.E                                  5.6.E.1
  Apply detection techniques to         SQL injection attacks can be detected by
  identify and report indicators        reviewing application and server logs of user
  of application attacks by             input for SQL control words and symbols such
  analyzing log files.                  as:
                                          § A single or double quote character:
                                             `` , `
                                          § Boolean conditions like OR 1=1
                                          § A double dash (which indicates a comment
                                            in SQL): --
                                          § SQL control words (always in capital
                                            letters) like WHERE, IN, FROM
                                         5.6.E.2
                                        XSS attacks can be detected by reviewing
                                        user input for suspicious tags, particularly the
                                        <script>...</script> tag.




          AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                               return to contents   143
       UNIT

        5                  Securing Applications and Data



                               5.6.E                           5.6.E.3
                              Apply detection techniques to    For web applications, buffer overflows can
                              identify and report indicators   be detected by checking the amount of data
                              of application attacks by        the user is sending to the web application in
                              analyzing log files.             their request. The fields commonly checked
                                                               are the URL length, cookie length, query string
                                                               length, and total request length. Long strings
                                                               in any of these fields can be an indicator of an
                                                               attempted buffer overflow attack.
                                                               5.6.E.4
                                                               Directory traversal attacks can be detected
                                                               by reviewing application and server logs.
                                                               HTTP GET requests that include paths
                                                               with sequences of ../ are indicators of an
                                                               adversary attempting a directory traversal.




144   AP Cybersecurity · Course Framework                                                     return to contents
AP CYBERSECURITY




Exam
Information
                 Exam Overview
                 The AP Cybersecurity Exam assesses student understanding of the skills and
                 learning objectives outlined in the course framework. The exam is 2 hours
                 and 10 minutes long and includes 60 multiple-choice questions and 1
                 free-response question.




                                                               Number of     Exam
       Section        Question Type                            Questions     Weighting        Timing
       I              Multiple-Choice Questions                60            70%              80 Minutes

       II             Free-Response Questions                  1             30%              50 Minutes




146   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                        return to contents
          How Student Learning
          Is Assessed on the
          AP Exam
          Section I: Multiple-Choice
          The multiple-choice section of the AP Cybersecurity Exam includes 60 multiple-
          choice questions. All five units of the course are assessed in the multiple-choice
          section of the AP Cybersecurity Exam. The assessment is organized around
          course skills with the following weighting.

                                                           Approximate Exam Weighting
            Units of Instruction                            for Multiple-Choice Section

            Skill Category 1: Analyze Risk                             25–40%

            Skill Category 2: Mitigate Risk                            25–40%

            Skill Category 3: Detect Attacks                           25–40%




          Section II: Free-Response
          The second section of the AP Cybersecurity Exam includes one free-response
          question.
          Device Security Analysis will provide students with several simulated sources
          about a single digital device. Sources may include security policies, firewall
          configurations, file-system permissions, and log files. The question will assess
          students’ ability to analyze the provided sources to identify security issues,
          detect evidence of attacks, describe how configuration or permission changes
          would affect the device and users, and evaluate how security controls, such as
          firewalls or automated systems, influence network traffic and device behavior.
          Students will be expected to cite evidence from the provided sources and
          explain their reasoning when describing attacks, permission settings, or the
          impact of policy or configuration modifications. The suggested time for this
          question is 50 minutes. Skill Categories 2 and 3 are assessed.




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                            return to contents   147
                Task Verbs Used
                in Free-Response
                Questions
                The following task verbs are commonly used in free-response questions:
                Identify: Provide information about cybersecurity concepts or evidence from
                the given sources.
                Explain: Provide reasons that support a solution or that account for how an
                outcome occurs, using specific evidence to validate your conclusion.
                Describe: Provide information about a cybersecurity process or outcome.
                Determine: Using the given sources, provide a specific result by applying
                appropriate criteria or reasoning.
                Write: Express in print form a proper command that has the indicated effect.




148   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                      return to contents
          Sample Exam
          Questions

          The sample exam questions that follow illustrate the relationship between the
          course framework and the AP Cybersecurity Exam and serve as examples of the
          types of questions that appear on the exam. After the sample questions is a table
          that shows which skill(s) and learning objective(s) each question assesses. The
          table also provides the answers to the multiple-choice questions.


          Section I: Multiple-Choice Questions
          The following are examples of the kinds of multiple-choice questions found on the
          exam.


          1.   A cybersecurity analyst recently completed a review of a hotel’s security.
               Consider the following information from their report.
               § The hotel’s Wi-Fi extends to the parking area, allowing outsiders
                 potential access to the network.
               § Open network ports in the conference center connect to the hotel’s
                 internal network and could enable spoofing of a legitimate device.
               § Guest feedback tablets in the lobby use a shared Wi-Fi network,
                 exposing nonsensitive customer satisfaction data.
               § Model numbers of printers and the firmware versions the printers are
                 running are visible on the internal network, revealing some information
                 about devices on the network.
               Which of the following risks would the cybersecurity analyst most likely
               document as a high risk?
               (A) The hotel’s Wi-Fi extending to the parking area
               (B) Open network ports in the conference center
               (C) Guest feedback tablets using a shared Wi-Fi network
               (D) The model numbers of printers and the firmware versions the printers
                   are running being visible




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                           return to contents   149
                2.   A school district wants to ensure that only the school principal (kmurray)
                     can edit faculty evaluation reports and to limit permissions for everyone
                     else. The district’s system administrator wants to set the following
                     permission for the file Oak_Park_HS, which contains the faculty
                     evaluations.
                  -rw-r----- kmurray staff 2048 Sep 18 10:45 Oak_Park_HS

                     Which of the following commands can be used to set the permissions
                     shown?
                     (A) chmod 444 Oak_Park_HS
                     (B) chmod 640 Oak_Park_HS
                     (C) chmod 740 Oak_Park_HS
                     (D) chmod 777 Oak_Park_HS

                3.   Consider the following email.

                      From: Management
                      To: Security Manager

                      _________________________________________________
                      Subject: New Access Rules for Transaction System

                      Thank you for implementing access restrictions on our internal
                      applications.

                      We are now interested in applying additional security rules that
                      automatically limit user access based on specific conditions. For
                      example, access to the transaction system should only be allowed
                      during business hours and from devices connected to the corporate
                      network.

                      Thanks!


                     Which of the following access control models best meets the request in the
                     email?
                     (A) DAC
                     (B) MAC
                     (C) RBAC
                     (D) RuBAC




150   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                         return to contents
          4.      A network technician is unable to access a server using port 443 from a
                  machine with an IP address of 192.168.45.37.
                  Consider the following access control list (ACL) for the server’s firewall.

                Rule Number Allow/Deny Direction Protocol             Port       Source
                     1            Allow        Inbound       TCP       22         ALL
                     2            Allow        Inbound       TCP       80         ALL
                     3            Deny         Inbound       TCP      443     192.168.0.0 -
                                                                             192.168.255.255
                     4            Allow        Inbound      ICMP      ALL         ALL
                     5            Allow        Inbound       TCP     3306         ALL
                     6            Deny         Inbound       TCP     3389         ALL
                     7            Allow        Inbound       TCP      443         ALL
                     8            Allow        Inbound       TCP      587         ALL
                     9            Deny         Inbound       TCP     8140    192.168.45.0 -
                                                                             192.168.45.255
                    10            Deny         Inbound       ALL      ALL         ALL


          	     Which of the following changes to the firewall would allow the network
                  technician to access the server?
                  (A) Swap firewall rule 1 with firewall rule 10
                  (B) Swap firewall rule 3 with firewall rule 4
                  (C) Swap firewall rule 3 with firewall rule 7
                  (D) Swap firewall rule 4 with firewall rule 7

          5.      A system administrator runs two hashing functions on four files. Consider
                  the following outputs for the two hashing functions.
          Function 1 outputs

                file1.txt - 8d8e115e5ebc50c8e03930beac6802a94ef4f36ab
                file2.txt - 79a7d08081d12ecf123d63845e38c14c09956ee79
                file3.txt - 02db6aefd093c317f8cf78a2fbe52a31b58a6bc5e
                file4.txt - bcd3cf9d8527f711031d0d908d84cbb0df97ce90b




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                             return to contents   151
                Function 2 outputs
                  file1.txt - 804537a7adfa4e1bce4d72d0b212a80af2dae3a5e
                  file2.txt - ba429665c8b95d05a963ee89fded2c7f18892d13e
                  file3.txt - 804537a7adfa4e1bce4d72d0b212a80af2dae3a5e
                  file4.txt - 7fa2901ebbb731eb283487afc033e45dae210a89e


                     Which of the following statements is supported by the file hashes?
                     (A) The files file1.txt and file3.txt are exact copies of each other.
                     (B) Function 1 is more secure than Function 2.
                     (C) Function 1 and Function 2 are the same hashing function.
                     (D) The files file1.txt and file3.txt have a collision in one hashing
                         function.

                6.   The security manager at a hospital is planning to upgrade the hospital’s
                     physical security system to ensure that only authorized personnel can
                     access areas containing sensitive medical equipment and patient records.
                     Because these areas require a high level of security, the manager wants an
                     authentication method that is unique to each individual and extremely
                     difficult for an adversary to duplicate or spoof. Which of the following
                     authentication methods is best suited for these areas?
                     (A) Authentication token
                     (B) Password
                     (C) Retina scan
                     (D) Access card

                7.   Which of the following best describes how offline password attacks work?
                     (A) Adversaries attempt user:password combinations in an active
                         authentication portal.
                     (B) Adversaries intercept communication as it travels across a network and
                         read the password in transit.
                     (C) Adversaries exploit weak access controls to directly retrieve plaintext
                         passwords stored in a database.
                     (D) Adversaries use automated tools to hash many potential passwords and
                         compare them to a captured hash.




152   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                          return to contents
           Questions 8 through 10 refer to the following.

           Consider the following email that was identified and reported as a phishing
           attempt.

            From: Human Resources
            To: All Employees

            _________________________________________________
            Subject: Final Reminder — Deadline Today!

            Our records indicate that your employee profile is incomplete. In order to
            remain in compliance with company-wide HR standards, all staff must con-
            firm their personal information by the end of the day. Failure to respond by
            this deadline may result in suspension of payroll access until your profile is
            verified.

            Please note: Over 92% of employees have already completed this verifica-
            tion, and you are among the last to finalize your record.

            To confirm your employee file, reply to this email with the following details:

            1. Personal phone number
            2. Pet’s name (for verification)
            3. Date of birth
            We appreciate your cooperation in keeping our records accurate and ensur-
            ing continued access to employee services.

            Thank you,

            Human Resources

           8.   Which of the following shows how the email uses urgency to pressure the
                recipient into responding?
                (A) The recipient is warned that they must confirm their personal
                    information by the end of the day.
                (B) The recipient is warned that failure to comply could result in payroll
                    suspension.
                (C) The recipient is encouraged to help human resources keep their records
                    accurate.
                (D) The recipient is told that the message comes from a trusted internal
                    department.




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                          return to contents   153
                9.   How does the email’s claim that “Over 92% of employees have already
                     completed the verification” attempt to pressure the recipient into responding
                     to the email?
                     (A) By framing the request as routine HR communication that seems safe,
                         showing the use of familiarity
                     (B) By implying that the opportunity to comply is limited and may soon be
                         lost, showing the use of scarcity
                     (C) By presenting the request as coming from those in power and
                         intimidating the recipient, showing the use of authority
                     (D) By applying social pressure and making the recipient believe most
                         coworkers have already acted, showing the use of consensus

                10. Which of the following is the most likely impact if the recipient responds to
                    this email with the requested information?
                     (A) An adversary could use the recipient’s personal details to impersonate
                         them.
                     (B) An adversary could use the recipient’s device as a foothold and move
                         laterally on the network compromising other devices.
                     (C) An adversary could infect the recipient’s device with malicious code
                         hidden in the reply email.
                     (D) An adversary could disrupt the entire payroll system by disabling access
                         for all employees.

                11. A natural gas company’s help desk receives reports from employees that the
                    company’s website is intermittently crashing when they try to log in. The
                    cybersecurity analyst reviews the server’s access logs and finds the following
                    entries.
                  [22/Oct/2025:10:11:02] "GET /index.html HTTP/1.1" 200 4521
                  [22/Oct/2025:10:11:07] "GET /about.html HTTP/1.1" 200 3890
                  [22/Oct/2025:10:11:10] "GET ../../../../etc/passwd HTTP/1.1" 403 721
                  [22/Oct/2025:10:11:12] "GET ../../../../etc/shadow HTTP/1.1" 403 654


                     Which of the following application attacks is indicated in the log file?
                     (A) Buffer overflow attack
                     (B) Cross site scripting attack
                     (C) Directory traversal attack
                     (D) SQL injection attack




154   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                            return to contents
          12. The system administrator at a high school receives an alert that there
              may have been multiple unauthorized login attempts to the school’s
              online grading system. To investigate, the administrator decides to review
              the authentication logs. Which of the following best describes how
              authentication logs can be used to determine whether unauthorized login
              attempts have occurred?
               (A) The logs record which password was used in each login attempt, which
                   allows the administrator to verify account ownership.
               (B) The logs record all login activity, which allows the administrator to
                   reconstruct when and how login attempts occurred.
               (C) The logs record the location of each user attempting to log in, which
                   allows the administrator to identify login attempts from other
                   geographic regions.
               (D) The logs record the type of device attempting to log in, which allows the
                   administrator to block unauthorized devices.

          13. The network administrator for a manufacturing facility has implemented
              a signature-based network detection system. Which of the following is
              a potential impact of using this network detection method instead of
              anomaly-based detection?
               (A) More false negative alerts
               (B) Higher operating costs
               (C) Slower detection time
               (D) More alert fatigue

          14. Consider the following lines from a log file.
            2025-09-25 08:01:14 ARP Reply: 192.168.1.13 is-at 00:01:5e:00:fc:16
            2025-09-25 09:14:15 ARP Reply: 192.168.1.13 is-at 00:3b:cc:5e:ee:01

               Which of the following attack types is indicated in the log file?
               (A) ARP poisoning attack
               (B) DNS poisoning attack
               (C) Evil-twin attack
               (D) MAC flooding attack

          15. Which of the following best describes the length of a cryptographic hash
              function output?
               (A) The length of the output is longer than the input due to the hashing
                   process.
               (B) The length of the output is fixed regardless of the length of the input.
               (C) The length of the output varies based on the length of the input.
               (D) The length of the output is shorter than the length of the input.




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                            return to contents   155
                16. A state’s National Guard base is documenting cybersecurity risks from
                    physical vulnerabilities. Which of the following would be classified as a
                    moderate risk?
                     (A) An unlocked trailer containing non-networked office equipment that
                         cannot be used to access sensitive systems
                     (B) A locked warehouse with noncritical computers that could be a
                         foothold to access other network resources
                     (C) A publicly accessible touchscreen directory for visitors that contains no
                         sensitive data and is unlikely to be exploited
                     (D) A main server room that contains sensitive systems and information
                         and does not have sufficiently restricted or controlled access

                Questions 17 through 20 refer to the following.

                Consider the following article.

                    Small Town Bank Disrupts Attempted Cyber Attack on Customer
                    Database
                    Fairgrove Community Bank, a local financial institution serving resi-
                    dents of central Kentucky, reported that it successfully stopped a cyber
                    intrusion attempt earlier this week aimed at its customer database.
                    The attack was detected on Tuesday afternoon when automated security
                    systems flagged unusual database queries originating from the bank’s
                    online loan application form. Investigators determined that the form was
                    being used to input malicious code.
                    “One of the strings the adversary submitted included ‘ OR ‘1‘=‘1‘;-
                    -, ” said James Holloway, a network administrator at Fairgrove Commu-
                    nity Bank. “That’s a common trick pulled from online tutorials.”
                    Holloway said the attacker did not succeed in accessing any customer
                    data, but the attempt revealed a flaw in the bank’s web application.
                    Fairgrove Community Bank’s security team has since patched the vul-
                    nerability. No data was compromised, and banking operations continued
                    without interruption.
                    “This wasn’t some advanced adversary,” Holloway added. “They were
                    copying code from the internet and testing to see if anything would
                    work. But even simple attacks like this can work if we don’t implement
                    best practices.”
                    Fairgrove Community Bank says it is conducting a full audit of its
                    customer-facing applications to ensure proper protections are in place.

                17. Which of the following best describes the adversary in this scenario?
                     (A) Cyberterrorist
                     (B) Script kiddie
                     (C) State actor
                     (D) Insider


156   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                            return to contents
          18. Which of the following types of attacks occurred when the adversary
              submitted a string that included ‘ OR ‘1‘=‘1‘;--?
               (A) SQL injection attack
               (B) Buffer overflow attack
               (C) Cross site scripting attack
               (D) Directory traversal attack

          19. Which of the following security controls would most likely prevent an attack
              like this in the future?
               (A) Encryption
               (B) Stateful firewall
               (C) Input sanitization
               (D) Access control list

          20. Which of the following best explains how the adversary attempted
              to manipulate the bank’s customer database through the online loan
              application form?
               (A) When user input is fed into a server’s file system, HTTP requests can
                   access sensitive data.
               (B) When user input contains executable scripts, those scripts can run in
                   the user’s browser and access sensitive data.
               (C) When user input exceeds the size of the designated memory, it can
                   allow the adversary to access, modify, and delete files.
               (D) When user input from a web form is fed directly into a database query,
                   an adversary can inject control characters that can allow an adversary to
                   view or modify the contents of a database.

          21. An organization only allows their users to log into a system if they are
              physically in one of the following time zones (a time zone is a region where
              everyone uses the same clock time).
               § Eastern time zone
               § Central time zone
               § Mountain time zone
               § Pacific time zone

               Which of the following authentication factors is being used to verify the
               identity of the users?
               (A) Biometric factor
               (B) Knowledge factor
               (C) Location factor
               (D) Possession factor




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                            return to contents   157
                22. A hospital’s security manager has implemented an automated network
                    security tool with the following functions.
                     § The tool analyzes network traffic for signs of malicious activity so the
                       security team can quickly spot potential threats.
                     § The tool generates an alert when suspicious or malicious traffic is
                       detected because the hospital wants to be notified right away if an attack
                       is attempted.
                     § The tool does not take direct action to block or stop the traffic itself
                       because the hospital wants administrators to decide how to respond to
                       threats.

                     Which of the following security systems did the security manager
                     implement?
                     (A) Data loss prevention system
                     (B) Network intrusion prevention system
                     (C) Network intrusion detection system
                     (D) Security information and event management system

                Section II: Free-Response Question
                The following is an example of the free-response question found on the exam.

                Device Security Analysis

                The following sources all come from the same device and are captured in a risk
                assessment for this device.

                Source 1

                The device’s IP address is 192.168.1.10.


                Device Firewall Settings

                   Rule                                                          Port
                  Number     Action         Source     Destination    Direction Number       Protocol
                     1        Deny    172.45.66.184    192.168.1.10    Inbound       22           SSH
                     2        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound       21           FTP
                     3        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound       80          HTTP
                     4        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound      445           SMB
                     5        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound      443        HTTPS
                     6        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound       22           SSH
                     7        Allow   172.45.66.184    192.168.1.10    Inbound     3306        MySQL
                     8        Allow          ALL       192.168.1.10    Inbound     3389           RDP
                     9        Allow    192.168.1.50    192.168.1.10    Inbound     5900           VNC
                     10       Deny           ALL           ALL         Inbound      ALL           ALL




158   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                               return to contents
          Source 2

            sudo tail -n 30 /var/log/app/network_app.log
            1 - Nov 10 09:00:11 ubuntu sudo: jprice : TTY=pts/0 ;
            PWD=/home/jprice ; USER=root ; COMMAND=/usr/bin/
            less/var/log/syslog
            2 - Nov 10 09:00:15 ubuntu sudo: pam_unix(sudo:
            session): session opened for user root by
            jprice(uid=1000)
            3 - Nov 10 09:00:35 ubuntu apt-get[1345]: Get:1
            http://archive.ubuntu.com jammy InRelease [265 kB]
            4 - Nov 10 09:00:46 ubuntu apt-get[1345]: Get:2
            http://security.ubuntu.com jammy-security InRelease
            [110 kB]
            5 - Nov 10 09:00:55 ubuntu apt-get[1345]: Fetched
            375 kB in 19s (19.7 kB/s)
            6 - Nov 10 09:01:00 ubuntu apt-get[1345]: Reading
            package lists... Done
            7 - Nov 10 09:01:01 ubuntu sudo: pam_unix(sudo:
            session):
            session closed for user root
            8 - Nov 10 09:02:14 ubuntu jprice: executed command:
            ‘ufw status verbose‘
            9 - Nov 10 09:02:14 ubuntu jprice: executed command:
            ‘systemctl status apache2‘
            10- Nov 10 09:02:16 ubuntu jprice: executed command:
            ‘tail –n /var/log/auth.log‘
            11 - Nov 10 09:03:10 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘systemctl status apache2‘
            12 - Nov 10 09:03:35 ubuntu systemd[1]: Starting
            Daily apt download activities...
            13 - Nov 10 09:03:36 ubuntu systemd[1]: Finished
            Daily apt download activities.
            14 - Nov 10 09:04:00 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘ss -tuln‘
            15 - Nov 10 09:04:01 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘cat/etc/ufw/user.rules‘
            16 - Nov 10 09:05:11 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘journalctl -xe‘
            17 - Nov 10 09:05:32 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘df -h‘
            18 - Nov 10 09:05:50 ubuntu jprice: executed
            command: ‘du -sh/var/log‘




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                 return to contents   159
                  19 - Nov 10 09:06:02 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘top -n 1‘
                  20 - Nov 10 09:06:33 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘curl -I http://localhost‘
                  21 - Nov 10 09:06:33 ubuntu sudo:
                  pam_unix(sudo:session): session opened for user root
                  by jprice(uid=1000)
                  22 - Nov 10 09:06:34 ubuntu sudo:
                  pam_unix(sudo:session): session closed for user root
                  23 - Nov 10 09:07:01 ubuntu CRON[1773]:
                  pam_unix(cron:session): session opened for user root
                  by (uid=0)
                  24 - Nov 10 09:07:01 ubuntu CRON[1773]:
                  pam_unix(cron:session): session closed for user root
                  25 - Nov 10 09:07:45 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘ip addr‘
                  26 - Nov 10 09:07:47 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘netstat - tulnp‘
                  27 - Nov 10 09:08:10 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘ufw status verbose‘
                  28 - Nov 10 09:08:11 ubuntu systemd[1]: Reloading
                  firewall rules (ufw.service)...
                  29 - Nov 10 09:08:11 ubuntu systemd[1]: Reloaded
                  firewall rules (ufw.service).
                  30 - Nov 10 09:08:20 ubuntu jprice: executed
                  command: ‘exit‘

                Source 3


                  sudo tail -n 30 /var/log/auth.log
                  1 - Nov 10 14:11:43 ubuntu sshd[1123]: Server
                  listening on 0.0.0.0 port 22.
                  2 - Nov 10 14:11:43 ubuntu sshd[1123]: Server
                  listening on :: port 22.
                  3 - Nov 10 14:21:01 ubuntu vsftpd[2184]: Failed login
                  for invalid user admin from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp
                  4 - Nov 10 14:21:02 ubuntu vsftpd[2186]: Failed login
                  for invalid user root from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp
                  5 - Nov 10 14:21:03 ubuntu vsftpd[2188]: Failed login
                  for invalid user test from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp
                  6 - Nov 10 14:21:04 ubuntu vsftpd[2190]: Failed login
                  for invalid user guest from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp
                  7 - Nov 10 14:21:05 ubuntu vsftpd[2192]: Failed login
                  for invalid user ubuntu from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp



160   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                 return to contents
            8 - Nov 10 14:21:06 ubuntu vsftpd[2194]: Failed login
            for invalid user deploy from 203.0.113.25 port 21 ftp
            9 - Nov 10 14:21:07 ubuntu vsftpd[2196]: Failed
            login for invalid user support from 203.0.113.25
            port 21 ftp
            10 - Nov 10 14:21:08 ubuntu vsftpd[2198]: Failed
            login for invalid user admin1 from 203.0.113.25 port
            21 ftp
            11 - Nov 10 14:21:09 ubuntu vsftpd[2200]: Failed
            login for invalid user oracle from 203.0.113.25 port
            21 ftp
            12 - Nov 10 14:21:10 ubuntu vsftpd[2202]: Failed
            login for invalid user ftp from 203.0.113.25 port 21
            ftp
            13 - Nov 10 14:22:14 ubuntu sshd[2234]: Connection
            closed by authenticating user jprice 192.168.1.50
            port 22 [preauth]
            14 - Nov 10 14:22:15 ubuntu sshd[2234]: Accepted
            password for jprice from 192.168.1.50 port 22 ssh2
            15 - Nov 10 14:22:15 ubuntu sshd[2234]:
            pam_unix(sshd:session): session opened for user
            jprice by (uid=0)
            16 - Nov 10 14:25:47 ubuntu sudo: jprice : TTY=pts/0 ;
            PWD=/home/jprice ; USER=root ; COMMAND=/usr/bin/apt
            update
            17 - Nov 10 14:25:47 ubuntu sudo:
            pam_unix(sudo:session): session opened for user root
            by jprice(uid=1000)
            18 - Nov 10 14:25:48 ubuntu sudo:
            pam_unix(sudo:session):session closed for user root
            19 - Nov 10 14:28:02 ubuntu sshd[2331]: Connection
            closed by 203.0.113.25 [preauth]
            20 - Nov 10 14:29:01 ubuntu CRON[2345]:
            pam_unix(cron:session): session opened for user root
            by (uid=0)
            21 - Nov 10 14:29:01 ubuntu CRON[2345]:
            pam_unix(cron:session): session closed for user root
            22 - Nov 10 14:30:17 ubuntu kernel: [UFW BLOCK]
            IN=eth0 OUT= SRC=203.0.113.25 DST=192.168.1.10
            PROTO=TCP PORT=25 SYN
            23 - Nov 10 14:30:18 ubuntu sshd[2369]: Failed
            password for invalid user user from 203.0.113.25
            port 22 ssh2
            24 - Nov 10 14:30:18 ubuntu sshd[2370]: Received
            disconnect from 203.0.113.25 port 49151:11: Bye Bye
            [preauth]



AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                  return to contents   161
                  25 - Nov 10 14:30:18 ubuntu kernel: [UFW BLOCK]
                  IN=eth0 OUT= SRC=203.0.113.25 DST=192.168.1.10
                  PROTO=TCP PORT=77 SYN
                  26 - Nov 10 14:31:55 ubuntu systemd-logind[99]: New
                  session 7 of user jprice.
                  27 - Nov 10 14:31:55 ubuntu systemd: Started Session
                  7 of user jprice.
                  28 - Nov 10 14:31:55 ubuntu sudo: jprice : TTY=pts/0 ;
                  PWD=/home/jprice ; USER=root ; COMMAND=/usr/bin/
                  journalctl -xe
                  29 - Nov 10 14:31:55 ubuntu sudo:
                  pam_unix(sudo:session): session opened for user root
                  by jprice(uid=1000)
                  30 - Nov 10 14:31:56 ubuntu sudo:
                  pam_unix(sudo:session): session closed for user root




                Source 4

                  sudo tail -n 30 /var/log/nginx/access_log
                  1 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:14
                  -0500] "GET/index.html HTTP/1.1" 200 4212 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  2 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:15
                  -0500] "GET /assets/css/style.css HTTP/1.1" 200 1024
                  "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  3 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:15
                  -0500] "GET /assets/js/main.js HTTP/1.1" 200 2876
                  "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  4 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:16
                  -0500] "GET /images/logo.png HTTP/1.1" 200 2048 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  5 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:17
                  -0500] "GET /about.html HTTP/1.1" 200 3198 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  6 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:18
                  -0500] "GET /contact.html HTTP/1.1" 200 2951 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  7 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:20
                  -0500] "POST /contact_form HTTP/1.1" 200 87
                  "https://example.local/contact.html" "Mozilla/5.0
                  (Ubuntu)"
                  8 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:02:21
                  -0500] "GET /dashboard HTTP/1.1" 200 4981 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"




162   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                  return to contents
            9 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:03:10 -0500]
            "GET /api/user/profile?id=12 HTTP/1.1" 200 614 "-"
            "curl/7.81.0"
            10 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:03:11
            -0500] "GET /api/data/list HTTP/1.1" 200 1187 "-"
            "curl/7.81.0"
            11 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:03:12 -0500]
            "POST /api/user/update HTTP/1.1" 200 152 "-"
            "curl/7.81.0"
            12 - 10.0.0.5 - admin [10/Nov/2025:09:04:01
            -0500] "GET /admin/login HTTP/1.1" 200 4329 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0)"
            13 - 10.0.0.5 - admin [10/Nov/2025:09:04:02 -0500]
            "POST /admin/login HTTP/1.1" 302 112 "https://
            example.local/admin/login" "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT
            10.0)"
            14 - 10.0.0.5 - admin [10/Nov/2025:09:04:03 -0500]
            "GET /admin/dashboard HTTP/1.1" 200 6275 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0)"
            15 - 203.0.113.45 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:04:11 -0500]
            "GET ../../../../etc/passwd HTTP/1.1" 400 234 "-"
            "curl/7.68.0"
            16 - 203.0.113.45 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:04:12 -0500]
            "GET ../../../etc/shadow HTTP/1.1" 403 312 "-"
            "curl/7.68.0"
            17 - 203.0.113.45 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:04:13 -0500]
            "GET ../../../var/www/html/config.php.bak HTTP/1.1"
            404 198 "-" "curl/7.68.0"
            18 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:04:15 -0500]
            "GET /api/status HTTP/1.1" 200 94 "-" "curl/7.81.0"
            19 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:04:16
            -0500] "GET /logout HTTP/1.1" 302 51 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
            20 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:04:17
            -0500] "GET /login.html HTTP/1.1" 200 3811 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
            21 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:00
            -0500] "GET /favicon.ico HTTP/1.1" 200 428 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
            22 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:22
            -0500] "GET /docs/index.html HTTP/1.1" 200 2491 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
            23 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:05:23 -0500]
            "GET /api/docs HTTP/1.1" 200 682 "-" "curl/7.81.0"
            24 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:25
            -0500] "GET /help HTTP/1.1" 200 4122 "-"
            "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"



AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                               return to contents   163
                  25 - 192.168.1.55 - - [10/Nov/2025:09:05:26 -0500]
                  "GET /api/user/profile?id=14 HTTP/1.1" 200 637 "-"
                  "curl/7.81.0"
                  26 - 10.0.0.5 - admin [10/Nov/2025:09:05:27 -0500]
                  "GET /admin/settings HTTP/1.1" 200 5214 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0)"
                  27 - 10.0.0.5 - admin [10/Nov/2025:09:05:28
                  -0500] "POST /admin/update HTTP/1.1" 200 164 "-"
                  "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0)"
                  28 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:29
                  -0500] "GET /assets/js/analytics.js HTTP/1.1" 200
                  1193 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"
                  29 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:30
                  -0500] "GET / HTTP/1.1" 200 4231 "-" "Mozilla/5.0
                  (Ubuntu)"
                  30 - 192.168.1.50 - jprice [10/Nov/2025:09:05:31
                  -0500] "GET /images/banner.jpg HTTP/1.1" 200 3087
                  "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Ubuntu)"


                Source 5

                  ls -l /home/jprice/Documents
                  -rw-r--r-- 1 jprice jprice     2143 Nov 08 09:15 report.txt
                  -rw------- 1 jprice jprice     1024 Nov 02 09:01 secrets.key
                  -rwxr-xr-x 1 jprice jprice     8576 Nov 10 11:02   backup.sh
                  -r--r----- 1 jprice admin      3421 Nov 06 11:53   config.cfg
                  -rw-rw-r-- 1 jprice devteam 5012 Nov 10 09:04      notes.md
                  -rwx------ 1 jprice jprice     7744 Nov 10 06:17 deploy_script
                  -rw-r----- 1 jprice admin      2088 Nov 09 09:36   database.ini
                  -rwxrwx--- 1 jprice devteam 9281 Nov 04 01:27 run_tests.sh
                  -rw-r--rw- 1 jprice shared     3999 Nov 01 12:08 public_data.csv




164   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                   return to contents
          Source 6

          Acceptable Use Policy

          Required Activities:

             Users must keep the operating system and installed software up to date.
          Permitted Activities:

             Users may connect peripheral devices such as keyboards, mice, monitors,
              and printers as needed for daily work.
          Prohibited Activities:

             Users may not connect external drives, USB storage devices, or other
              removable media unless explicitly authorized.
             Users may not modify system configurations, security settings, or access
              controls without authorization.
             Users may not access social media websites on this device.



          Device Security Analysis

          Use the given information to respond to parts A, B, C, D, and E. Label any subparts
          (e.g., i and ii) that may be present.

          Part A

          Consider the policy for the device in Source 6.

              i. Explain how one part of the policy helps protect the device.
              ii. Explain how one rule in the current policy could be modified to make the
                  device more secure. Include a specific example in your response.
          Part B

          In the authorization log, there is evidence of a password attack in rows 3–12.

              i. Describe the evidence in the log file that indicates a password attack.
                 Include specific entries from the log file in your response.
              ii. Identify the IP address of the adversary.
          Part C

          Consider all the sources from the device.

              i. Explain how the permission settings for one file in the
                 /home/jprice/Documents directory determine the level of access for
                 that file for the owner, group, and all other users on the system. Include the
                 name of the file in your response.
              ii. Other than removing all permissions from all users, describe one way
                  the permission settings for one file on the system could be configured to
                  restrict access for some users on the device. Include the name of the file in
                  your response.
             iii. Using the explanation from part C (ii), write one or more chmod
                  commands that set the permissions described.




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                               return to contents   165
                Part D

                Consider all the sources from the device.

                    i. Explain how one connection attempt on the device was blocked by the
                       device’s firewall. Include evidence from a log file in your response.
                    ii. Other than allowing all traffic for all services, describe a modification to
                        one firewall rule that would allow the connection attempt identified in
                        part D (i).
                   iii. Other than allowing the connection attempt identified in part D (i),
                        describe one impact of your modification from part D (ii) on incoming or
                        outgoing network traffic on the device.
                Part E

                Apart from the password attack identified in part B, there is evidence of another
                attack on the device. Consider all the sources from the device.

                    i. Determine the type of attack evidenced in a log file.
                    ii. Describe specific information in the log file that indicates the attack
                        named in part E (i).
                   iii. Describe one way an automated system could halt this type of attack in
                        real time.
                   iv. This attack could be mitigated by an automated system, such as a firewall,
                       IDS, IPS, or AI. Identify a different countermeasure that could mitigate,
                       prevent, or deter the attack.




166   AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                              return to contents
          Answer Key and
          Question Alignment to
          Course Framework

               Multiple-Choice            Answer            Skill    Learning Objective
                 Question
                       1                    B               1.C               3.1.C
                       2                    B               2.D               5.2.D
                       3                    D               2.B               5.2.C
                       4                    C               2.C               3.4.B
                       5                    D               1.A               4.2.A
                       6                    C               2.B               4.2.C
                       7                    D               1.B               4.2.B
                       8                    A               1.A               1.1.A
                       9                    D               1.B               2.1.A
                       10                   A               1.C               1.1.C
                       11                   C               3.D               5.6.E
                       12                   B               3.A               4.4.A
                       13                   A               3.C               3.5.D
                       14                   A               3.D               3.5.E
                       15                   B               2.A               4.2.A
                       16                   B               1.D               2.2.C
                       17                   B               1.A               2.1.B
                       18                   A               3.D               5.6.E
                       19                   C               2.B               5.5.B
                       20                   D               1.B               5.1.B
                       21                   C               2.A               4.2.C
                       22                   C               3.A               3.5.A




              Free-Response Question               Skills           Learning Objectives
               Device Security Analysis     2.A, 2.B, 2.C, 2.D,     3.1.A, 3.4.B, 3.4.D, 3.5.A,
                                                 3.B, 3.D           3.5.E, 4.1.C, 4.2.D, 4.3.A,
                                                                    4.3.C, 4.4.A, 4.4.D, 5.1.B,
                                                                        5.2.D, 5.5.B, 5.6.E




AP Cybersecurity · Exam Information                                                               return to contents   167
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK
AP CYBERSECURITY

Scoring Guidelines
 Device Security Analysis                                                                                    14 points

Use the given information to respond to parts A, B, C, D, and E. Label any subparts (e.g., i and ii) that may be present.

Part A
Consider the policy for the device in Source 6.
     i. Explain how one part of the policy helps protect the device.
    ii. Explain how one rule in the current policy could be modified to make the device more secure. Include a specific
        example in your response.

Part B
In the authorization log, there is evidence of a password attack in rows 3–12.
     i. Describe the evidence in the log file that indicates a password attack. Include specific entries from the log file in
        your response.
    ii. Identify the IP address of the adversary.

Part C
Consider all the sources from the device.
     i. Explain how the permission settings for one file in the /home/jprice/Documents directory determine the
        level of access for that file for the owner, group, and all other users on the system. Include the name of the file in
        your response.
    ii. Other than removing all permissions from all users, describe one way the permission settings for one file on the system
        could be configured to restrict access for some users on the device. Include the name of the file in your response.
   iii. Using the explanation from part C (ii), write one or more chmod commands that set the permissions described.

Part D
Consider all the sources from the device.
     i. Explain how one connection attempt on the device was blocked by the device’s firewall. Include evidence from a log
        file in your response.
    ii. Other than allowing all traffic for all services, describe a modification to one firewall rule that would allow the
        connection attempt identified in part D (i).
   iii. Other than allowing the connection attempt identified in part D(i), describe one impact of your modification from
        part D (ii) on incoming or outgoing network traffic on the device.

Part E
Apart from the password attack identified in part B, there is evidence of another attack on the device. Consider all the
sources from the device.
     i. Determine the type of attack evidenced in a log file.
    ii. Describe specific information in the log file that indicates the attack named in part E (i).
   iii. Describe one way an automated system could halt this type of attack in real time.
    iv. This attack could be mitigated by an automated system, such as a firewall, IDS, IPS, or AI. Identify a different
        countermeasure that could mitigate, prevent, or deter the attack.
          AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                              return to contents   169
                  Model Responses

                 Part A
                      i. Not allowing users to connect removable media devices helps protect the device against
                         malware that could be installed on it. Because the organization does not have control over
                         external devices, they cannot guarantee that no malware will automatically be installed when
                         they are plugged into the device.
                     ii. The AUP could require the system to check for updates within a certain time frame, such as
                         weekly. If they force the system to check for updates weekly, this will ensure that all patches are
                         installed in a timely fashion.

                 Part B
                      i. There are multiple failed login attempts within seconds of each other all from the same device.
                         Row 3 is the first failed login at 14:21:01, and 9 seconds later there are 10 failed login attempts
                         ending on row 12 at 14:21:10.
                     ii. 203.0.113.25

                 Part C
                      i. In the run_tests.sh file, the owner of the file and the group devteam have all permissions (read,
                         write, and execute) for the file because the first and second groupings have rwx, while all other
                         users on the system have no permissions for the file because the last grouping has ---.
                     ii. To harden the report.txt file, they could remove the read permission from both the group and
                         all other users for this system.
                     iii. “chmod g-r report.txt” and then “chmod o-r report.txt”

                 Part D
                      i. Since firewall rule 10 denies all traffic to port 25 due to the absence of an allow rule, when
                         the connection attempt from IP 203.0.113.25 occurs on line 22 in the auth log, the attempt to
                         access port 25 is blocked.
                     ii. Rule 2 of the firewall could change the port number from 21 to 25.
                     iii. Changing the port in rule 2 to 25 from 21 would stop all inbound FTP/port 21 traffic to the
                          device.

                 Part E
                      i. Directory traversal attack
                     ii. In lines 15–17 of the web application log (source 4), there are attempts of “../..”, which is the
                         classic sign of a directory traversal attack. They are attempting to go back in the file structure
                         of the system where the web application is hosted—where they could try to access parts of the
                         system that they should not have access to.
                     iii. An automated system could notice the malicious signs of a directory traversal attack and shut
                          down the IP address from accessing the machine. So, in this case, it would stop the IP address
                          of 203.0.113.45 from accessing the device when it recognizes the “../..” in the URL.
                     iv. The system could sanitize the user inputs to not allow any “../..” in the URL submitted by the
                         user.




170   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                            return to contents
Scoring Guidelines for Question: Device Security Analysis

   Reporting
                                                     Scoring Criteria
   Category

   Part A (i)      0 points                                   1 point
  (0–1 points)     Does not explain how any part of the       Accurately explains how one part of the
                   policy helps protect the device.           policy helps protect the device.
    Point 1
                                           Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                   Responses that do not earn this point:     Responses that earn this point:
                   § Are vague or unrelated to the policy.    § Explain how a part of the acceptable
                   § Describe something not in the policy.      use policy protects the device.

                   § Do not clearly connect the policy to
                     improved security.
                   § Identify something in the policy
                     without explaining how it protects the
                     device.

                   Examples that do not earn this point:      Examples that earn this point:
                   § “Long passwords are good.”               § “Users need to keep their operating
                   § “Users should avoid downloading            system and software up to date
                     games.”                                    because this ensures all known
                                                                vulnerabilities are patched,
                   § “The policy keeps the device safe.”
                                                                preventing adversaries from
                                                                exploiting them on the device.”
                                                              § “Keeping the operating system and
                                                                software up to date ensures known
                                                                vulnerabilities are patched, reducing
                                                                the risk of adversaries exploiting
                                                                those vulnerabilities on the device.”




         AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                          return to contents   171
                     Reporting
                                                                        Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                      Part A (ii)     0 points                                   1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not explain a modification to         Accurately explains how one rule in the
                                      the current policy or describes a          current policy could be modified to make
                       Point 2
                                      modification that would not improve        the device more secure, including a
                                      security.                                  specific example in the response.

                                                              Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:     Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Suggest adding a new rule instead of     § Propose a modification to a policy
                                        modifying an existing rule.                rule and accurately explain how this
                                      § Suggest a modification that would          helps make the device more secure.
                                        not enhance security.
                                      § Do not provide evidence from a log
                                        file.
                                      § Identify or describe without
                                        explaining.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:      Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “Allow social media during lunch         § “Modifying the removable media
                                        breaks.”                                   rule to include blocking wireless
                                      § “Let users plug in USB devices if they     external storage, such as Bluetooth
                                        think it’s safe.”                          file transfers, would help prevent
                                                                                   wireless Bluetooth attacks because
                                                                                   it eliminates an additional attack
                                                                                   vector.”
                                                                                 § “Requiring automatic OS updates
                                                                                   instead of manual updates ensures
                                                                                   updates are applied without user
                                                                                   intervention, helping keep the system
                                                                                   up to date and reducing exposure to
                                                                                   known vulnerabilities.”




172   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                           return to contents
Reporting
                                                    Scoring Criteria
Category

 Part B (i)      0 points                                    1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not describe evidence of a             Accurately describes valid evidence
                 password attack in the authorization        in the log file that indicates a password
  Point 3
                 log or identifies the attack but does not   attack, including specific entries from a
                 include evidence from a log file.           log file in the response.

                                          Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:      Responses that earn this point:
                 § Mention entries unrelated to failed       § Describe multiple failed password
                   authentication attempts.                    attempts from the same IP address in
                 § Describe normal logins.                     quick succession.

                 Examples that do not earn this point:       Examples that earn this point:
                 § “Row 14 shows a successful login.”        § “Rows 3–12 show repeated failed FTP
                 § “There was a CRON job run at 14:29.”        login attempts for many usernames
                                                               within seconds.”




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                             return to contents   173
                     Reporting
                                                                          Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                      Part B (ii)     0 points                                     1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not identify the correct IP address     Accurately identifies the indicated IP
                                      or port in the password attack.              address or port in the password attack.
                       Point 4
                                                              Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:       Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Provide any IP address other than          § Identify IP address 203.0.113.25 as
                                        203.0.113.25.                                the adversary in the attack.
                                      § Identify multiple IP addresses.
                                      § Provide a port.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:        Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “113.25”                                   § “203.0.113.25”
                                      § “203.0.113.25 and 6.117.89.203”            § “IP address 203.0.113.25”




174   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                             return to contents
Reporting
                                                       Scoring Criteria
Category

 Part C (i)      0 points                                       1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not accurately explain file               Accurately explains how the permission
                 permissions or identifies incorrect user       settings for one file in the indicated
  Point 5
                 or group permissions.                          directory determine the level of access
                                                                for that file for the owner, group, and all
                                                                other users on the system, including the
                                                                name of the file in the response.

                                           Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:         Responses that earn this point:
                 § Misread the permission bits.                 § Explain the correct permissions for
                 § Describe permissions for a file not in         owner, group, and others for a chosen
                   the stimulus.                                  file and identify the file.

                 § Do not list the name of the file.
                 § Identify or describe without
                   explaining.

                 Examples that do not earn this point:          Examples that earn this point:
                 § “Everyone can read notes.md.”                § “For backup.sh, the owner has read,
                 § “deploy_script is open to all users.”          write, and execute permissions
                                                                  because the permissions are rwx,
                 § “The owner can read and write, the
                                                                  while the group and others have read
                   group can read, and all other users
                                                                  and execute permissions indicated
                   have no permissions.”
                                                                  by r-x.”
                                                                § “For secrets.key, only the owner
                                                                  has read and write permissions, as
                                                                  shown by rw-, while the group and
                                                                  others have no permissions since no
                                                                  permission bits are set.”
                                                                § “File: report.txt
                                                                   Owner: read and write since the first
                                                                   group is rw-
                                                                   Group: read only since the second
                                                                   group is r--
                                                                   Others: read only since the last group
                                                                   is r--”




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                                  return to contents   175
                     Reporting
                                                                         Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                      Part C (ii)     0 points                                     1 point

                     (0–1 points)     Does not describe a valid configuration      Accurately describes one way the
                                      change to the permissions of one file to     permission settings for one file on
                       Point 6        modify access for users on this device.      the system could be configured to
                                                                                   appropriately modify access (by granting
                                                                                   or removing permissions) for some users
                                                                                   on the device, including the name of the
                                                                                   file in the response.
                                                                Decision Rules and Scoring Notes
                                      Responses that do not earn this point:       Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Suggest removing all permissions for a § Suggest removing one or more
                                        file on this system.                     permissions from a file that it currently
                                      § Suggest removing all access for the      has.
                                         owner.                                    § Suggest removing read, write, or
                                      § Do not identify the file name.               execute access appropriately.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:        Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “Remove execute permission from            § “Remove read access for the group
                                        report.txt for owner.”                       and others on report.txt to keep it
                                      § “Remove all permissions so no one            private to the owner.”
                                        can access it.”                            § “Remove execute permission for the
                                      § “Give write permissions to all users on      owner on deploy_script.”
                                        secrets.key.”
                                      Additional notes:
                                      § The file explained in part C (i) does not have to be the same file discussed in part
                                        C (ii) to earn the point.




176   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                               return to contents
Reporting
                                                     Scoring Criteria
Category

Part C (iii)     0 points                                      1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not write a valid chmod command          Accurately writes one or more
                 or the command does not match the             chmod commands that would set the
  Point 7
                 permissions described in part C (ii).         permissions described in part C (ii).

                                           Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:        Responses that earn this point:
                 § Have incorrect command syntax.              § Use correct syntax, such as chmod
                 § Have permissions that do not match            600 filename, or symbolic
                   the configuration to restrict access          modes matching the response in part
                   described in part C (ii).                     C (ii).

                 Examples that do not earn this point:         Examples that earn this point:
                 § “chmod -rw------- deploy.sh”                § “chmod 200 run_tests.sh”
                 § “chmod 777 secrets.key”                     § “sudo chmod go-r report.txt”

                 Additional notes:
                 § Correct responses may begin with sudo, but sudo is not required to earn the
                   point.
                 § The response may still earn the point for part C (iii) if it did not earn the point
                   for part C (ii) as long as the chmod command accurately sets the permissions
                   described in part C (ii).




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                             return to contents   177
                     Reporting
                                                                       Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                      Part D (i)      0 points                                  1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not explain how a connection         Accurately explains how one connection
                                      attempt was blocked or identifies an      attempt on the device was blocked by
                       Point 8
                                      event unrelated to the firewall.          the device’s firewall, including evidence
                                                                                from a log file in the response.

                                                              Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:    Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Reference a login failure not caused    § Correctly identify a line from a log file
                                        by the firewall.                          and a firewall rule that would prevent
                                      § Indicate a successful login attempt.      the attempt in the log file, and explain
                                                                                  why it would be prevented.
                                      § Indicate multiple attempts being
                                        blocked where at least one attempt is   § Indicate how more than one
                                        incorrect.                                connection attempt is being blocked
                                                                                  by the firewall.
                                      § Do not provide evidence from a log
                                        file.
                                      § Identify or describe without
                                        explaining.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:     Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “User admin failed login because of a   § “Source 3 line 22 shows a blocked
                                        wrong password.”                          TCP SYN packet to port 25 from
                                      § “SSH from 192.168.1.50 was                203.0.113.25 because no firewall rule
                                        blocked.”                                 allows traffic on port 25.”
                                                                                § “In line 25 of the auth log, a
                                                                                  connection attempt to port 77 is
                                                                                  blocked by the firewall, as access to
                                                                                  port 77 is not permitted.”




178   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                            return to contents
Reporting
                                                      Scoring Criteria
Category

 Part D (ii)     0 points                                       1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not describe a valid change to a          Accurately describes a modification
                 firewall rule or suggests a modification       to one firewall rule that would allow
  Point 9
                 that does not allow the connection             the connection attempt identified in
                 attempt identified in part D (i).              part D (i).

                                             Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:         Responses that earn this point:
                 § Suggest adding another deny rule to          § Suggest a change that would allow
                   the firewall.                                  the connection attempt from
                 § Suggest altering an unrelated firewall         part D (i).
                   rule.
                 § Suggest allowing a modification that
                   would allow all traffic for all services.

                 Examples that do not earn this point:          Examples that earn this point:
                 § “Change rule 3 from allow to deny.”          § “Modify rule 8 to allow port 25 before
                 § “Disable the firewall.”                        the final deny-all rule.”

                 Additional notes:
                 § The response may still earn the point for part D (ii) if it did not earn the point for
                   part D (i).




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                                return to contents   179
                     Reporting
                                                                            Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                     Part D (iii)     0 points                                       1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not describe the impact of the            Correctly describes one impact of the
                                      modification suggested in part D (ii).         modification suggested in part D (ii) on
                      Point 10
                                                                                     incoming or outgoing network traffic on
                                                                                     the device.

                                                                Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:         Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Do not include an accurate impact of         § Describe an impact of implementing
                                        the firewall change.                           the modification to the firewall as
                                      § Include an incorrect impact of the             described in part D (ii).
                                        firewall change.
                                      § Only references the connections in
                                        part D (i) or part D (ii) being impacted.
                                      § Reference a different change than
                                        was recommended in part D (ii).

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:          Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “It would block all adversaries.”            § “Allowing port 25 would permit email
                                      § “It would stop brute force attempts.”          traffic into the device but could
                                                                                       expose the system to SMTP-based
                                      § “It would allow the connection that
                                                                                       attacks.”
                                        was blocked originally by the firewall.”




180   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                               return to contents
Reporting
                                                   Scoring Criteria
Category

 Part E (i)      0 points                                   1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not determine the type of attack.     Accurately determines the type of
                                                            attack evidenced in a log file.
 Point 11
                                          Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:     Responses that earn this point:
                 § Identify a type of attack not            § Identify directory traversal as the
                   supported by the evidence.                 type of attack.
                 § Indicate multiple attack types where
                   at least one attack is incorrect.
                 § Indicate a password attack.

                 Examples that do not earn this point:      Examples that earn this point:
                 § “Ping flood attack”                      § “There is evidence of a directory
                 § “DDoS attack”                              traversal attack.”

                 § “ARP poisoning and directory             § “Directory traversal”
                   traversal”




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                        return to contents   181
                     Reporting
                                                                            Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                      Part E (ii)     0 points                                       1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not describe how specific entries         Accurately describes specific
                                      indicate the attack using evidence from        information in the log file that indicates
                      Point 12
                                      the log or gives a description unrelated       the attack named in part E (i).
                                      to the log.

                                                                Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:         Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Do not include evidence from the log.        § Describe how the attack is indicated
                                      § Incorrectly interpret a directory              using evidence from source 4 lines
                                        traversal attack.                              15–17 that show attempts, like
                                                                                       “../../../../etc/passwd”.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:          Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “The attacker sent a POST request,           § “In source 4 line 15, the request
                                        which shows they were trying to hack           includes ‘../../../../etc/passwd’, which is
                                        the server.”                                   a path traversal sequence attempting
                                      § “There is a lot of traffic, which              to reach system files outside the web
                                        indicates an attack.”                          root.”

                                      § “The system blocked port 25, which           § “Lines 15–17 show attempts to
                                        indicates a traversal attack.”                 access sensitive files like
                                                                                       ‘/etc/passwd’ and ‘/etc/shadow’ using
                                                                                       repeated ‘../’, which is a signature of
                                                                                       directory traversal attacks.”




182   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                                 return to contents
Reporting
                                                   Scoring Criteria
Category

Part E (iii)     0 points                                   1 point
(0–1 points)     Does not describe how an automated         Accurately describes one way an
                 system could halt this type of attack.     automated system could halt this type of
 Point 13
                                                            attack in real time.

                                          Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                 Responses that do not earn this point:     Responses that earn this point:
                 § Reference making changes to the          § Correctly state that an automated
                   system prior to the attack.                system would notice the malicious
                 § Indicate an action that would not stop     traffic and give a way to stop this
                   the attack.                                traffic.
                                                            § Correctly state more than one way an
                                                              automated system would stop this
                                                              attack immediately.

                 Examples that do not earn this point:      Examples that earn this point:
                 § “The device could install updates to     § “An IPS could detect repeated ‘../’
                   stop the attack.”                          patterns and block 203.0.113.45
                 § “The system should deny social             immediately.”
                   media so attackers can’t get in.”        § “An intrusion prevention system
                                                              could monitor for attempts to access
                                                              protected files, like /etc/passwd, and
                                                              immediately drop the connection and
                                                              blacklist the IP.”




       AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                           return to contents   183
                     Reporting
                                                                            Scoring Criteria
                     Category

                     Part E (iv)      0 points                                       1 point
                     (0–1 points)     Does not identify a valid countermeasure       Accurately identifies a countermeasure
                                      or provides one already listed in the          other than firewall, IDS, IPS, or AI that
                      Point 14
                                      prompt.                                        could mitigate, prevent, or deter the
                                                                                     attack.

                                                                 Decision Rules and Scoring Notes

                                      Responses that do not earn this point:         Responses that earn this point:
                                      § Identify a firewall, IDS, IPS, or            § Identify sanitizing inputs.
                                        AI-based countermeasure.                     § Indicate not allowing “../..” patterns as
                                      § Do not identify a countermeasure               a way to stop this type of attack.
                                        that would stop this type of attack.

                                      Examples that do not earn this point:          Examples that earn this point:
                                      § “Install an IDS.”                            § “The application could sanitize user
                                      § “Disable Telnet from the device as it is       input to remove all ‘../’ sequences
                                        outdated.”                                     before processing.”




184   AP Cybersecurity · Scoring Guidelines                                                                 return to contents
collegeboard.org   © 2026 College Board.   APD-882-A
